[Amit Varma]: So here's something that happens in a small village in a big country in an
[Amit Varma]: uncertain time. You might think of it as a scene from a surreal dystopian novel.
[Amit Varma]: The story in this particular place starts when a widower in this village is
[Amit Varma]: picked up by the police because they want to amend a part of his body. He
[Amit Varma]: doesn't consent so you can call this amendment a mutilation. When the man is
[Amit Varma]: put through this procedure his wound turns septic and he dies. The villagers
[Amit Varma]: aren't happy obviously but the government returns. The block development
[Amit Varma]: officer in charge of that village wants more. There's a man repairing shoes by
[Amit Varma]: the roadside. The cops pick him up. The villagers know what will happen to him
[Amit Varma]: so they rise up in protest. They drive the block development officer and his
[Amit Varma]: henchmen who wear uniforms of the state out of the village. People from
[Amit Varma]: neighboring villages now assemble here to show solidarity but the state is
[Amit Varma]: mighty and the state is brutal. Hundreds of policemen descend upon this village
[Amit Varma]: along with the block development officer's boss the subdivisional
[Amit Varma]: magistrate. If you mess with the BDO the SDM will come. Police surround the
[Amit Varma]: village. After a night of siege at 6 in the morning they empty their guns. Two
[Amit Varma]: women making cow dung cakes outside their house die in the halo bullets. The
[Amit Varma]: cops now broadcast a warning that if all the men do not step out of their houses
[Amit Varma]: an aircraft will be called to bomb the whole area. First BDO then SDM. Now
[Amit Varma]: bomber aircraft? The terrified men step out and are rounded up. Between 400 to
[Amit Varma]: 500 men are then taken away for this physical procedure, this amendment, this
[Amit Varma]: mutilation, this attack on freedom and autonomy. By now I'm sure you've guessed
[Amit Varma]: the procedure. Is Nazbandi or sterilization? The village is peepli in
[Amit Varma]: Haryana. The time is the emergency of the mid-1970s when Indira Gandhi ruled as a
[Amit Varma]: dictator of India and a monstrous son Sanjay Gandhi spearheaded mass
[Amit Varma]: sterilizations in the ignorant belief that our problem was our population and
[Amit Varma]: such coercion was the only way to solve it. Much horror took place during the
[Amit Varma]: emergency. The entire opposition was locked up in jail. Many journalists were
[Amit Varma]: locked up in jail. Academics and dissenters went to jail. The entire
[Amit Varma]: Sanskrit Department of Delhi University was in jail. In fact my guest today
[Amit Varma]: reveals in a brilliant book on that period that Indira Gandhi put more
[Amit Varma]: Indians in jail during that time than the British did during the Quit India
[Amit Varma]: movement. I recommend that all of you read that brilliant book The Emergency a
[Amit Varma]: Personal History by Kumi Kapoor. Her own husband a respected journalist was
[Amit Varma]: locked up and the reason I'm telling you this story is that it's important to
[Amit Varma]: remember the past or we will repeat it. The central problem then is the central
[Amit Varma]: problem now. A state that has too much power and the pervasive mindset that we
[Amit Varma]: are subjects not citizens and to understand the past we need people who
[Amit Varma]: will record that past so that we do not forget. We must listen to them and we
[Amit Varma]: must honor their work.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and
[Unknown]: behavioral science. Please welcome your host Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen. My guest today is Kumi Kapoor, a legendary
[Amit Varma]: journalist well known for covering politics and for writing Inside Track, a
[Amit Varma]: column for the Indian Express that has now lasted decades. It is said that both
[Amit Varma]: Narendra Modi and Sonia Gandhi read her column to understand what's going on. She
[Amit Varma]: was a journalist at the time of the emergency and a book on that period, The
[Amit Varma]: Emergency a Personal History, is so good. You must read it to understand our
[Amit Varma]: country better. She has recently released a book on the history of the Parsi's
[Amit Varma]: which I will link from show notes. My conversation with Kumi is about her life,
[Amit Varma]: her early days as a journalist, Indian politics which she understands so well
[Amit Varma]: and the evolution of our media which she saw from the vantage points of both the
[Amit Varma]: reporter in the 70s and an editor in the 80s and a columnist since. We recorded
[Amit Varma]: this conversation at the end of August, so our discussion of the Congress and
[Amit Varma]: Rahul Gandhi may feel a bit dated and at least I have been personally impressed
[Amit Varma]: by developments on that front, so take that into account. And now before we
[Amit Varma]: begin our conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well
[Amit Varma]: I'd love to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online
[Amit Varma]: course, The Art of Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of
[Amit Varma]: all my past students. We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of
[Amit Varma]: students and vibrant community interaction. In the course itself,
[Amit Varma]: through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know about the
[Amit Varma]: craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much
[Amit Varma]: interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course
[Amit Varma]: cost rupees 10,000 plus GST or about 150 dollars and is a monthly thing, so if
[Amit Varma]: you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com slash clear
[Amit Varma]: writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer
[Amit Varma]: doesn't require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Kumi ji, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you, Amit. I've really been
[Amit Varma]: looking forward to this episode because one of course I've read your writing in
[Amit Varma]: your column in the Indian Express for many, many, many, many, many years and
[Amit Varma]: you've written two books and they're both great, but the first of those
[Amit Varma]: books, On the Emergency, is a book I have gifted to people and I recommend it to
[Amit Varma]: people all the time to sort of understand what really went down over
[Amit Varma]: there and often, you know, a lot of the things that it reveals about
[Amit Varma]: the state and our society and just human nature, I think those lessons hold true
[Amit Varma]: today. But, you know, before we get to talking about your books or those times,
[Amit Varma]: I'd love to know about your childhood. Like, you know, tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: where you were born, what your family was like, where you grew up. Well, I'm the
[Guest]: daughter of an ICS officer and that means, you know, you moved about around a
[Guest]: bit. I was born in Delhi, but my father was associated with the then Bombay
[Guest]: Cadres, so he was in Bombay and then we were also in Ahmedabad and he resigned
[Guest]: from the service at the time Bombay was split into Maharashtra and Gujarat and
[Guest]: after that I stayed in Bombay mainly. We were a middle-class Parsi family. And
[Amit Varma]: you've mentioned that, you know, you lived in South Bombay and, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: while your family went back a long way in terms of the history and how far back
[Amit Varma]: you could trace it, you know, that you were more, you know, they wanted to, I
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't say impose or indoctrinate, but they wanted you to adapt some of the, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the typical Parsi things they did, but you guys were rebellious girls. I
[Guest]: don't think we were so rebellious, but no, we were not the typical Parsi family at
[Guest]: all and later on my grandfather used to grumble that we didn't, that we
[Guest]: all married out. I mean, he wasn't alive when I got married, when my sister got
[Guest]: married. He said you didn't, you know, it wasn't so much indoctrination as you
[Guest]: didn't mix in an all Parsi, you know, friends and neighbors sort of thing. So, I
[Guest]: mean, we, and we didn't take the Parsi things serious, so seriously at all and
[Guest]: my parents were pretty pragmatic, so I don't think they tried to, you know,
[Guest]: impose too much. My elder sisters, in fact, were very embarrassed about it. I
[Guest]: don't think as a little one I just followed what was the lead, but later on,
[Guest]: especially when I was writing this book on the Parsis, I become very proud of my
[Guest]: heritage, something which I wasn't in my youth. I mean, I was more than a little
[Guest]: embarrassed about being different. Why were you embarrassed? Well, I don't know
[Guest]: if you've lived in Bombay, you will see that in those days at least we looked a
[Guest]: little different. We spoke broken Hindi and Parsis, when they speak among
[Guest]: themselves, you know, have a tendency to act superior about other people and
[Amit Varma]: things like that. Yeah, I have very dear Parsi friends and they are a bit snobbish
[Amit Varma]: and they do speak with a bit of an accent, but they're such wonderful people
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, I deeply love that. In your book, in the Parsis, one of the
[Amit Varma]: things that struck me while reading the book is that even before you come to all
[Amit Varma]: the famous Parsi names that you know about, in your introductory chapter, you
[Amit Varma]: talk about your own family lineage and it is so rich. Like, for example, you go,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you talk about your paternal ancestors, your maternal ancestor, you
[Amit Varma]: mention one gentleman named Dastur Jamasp Asa, who was born in Nafsari in
[Amit Varma]: 1693 and, you know, we know so much of his history. You spoke about how he, quote,
[Amit Varma]: annoyed the leading priests of his time by offering translations of religious
[Amit Varma]: texts to Behedins, stop quote, and Behedins were kind of people. They were the
[Amit Varma]: non-priestly class. They were the non-priestly class and so, you know,
[Amit Varma]: radical at the time and later on, of course, you point out that your father
[Amit Varma]: was a Behedin and that was also, in that sense, within the Parsi community.
[Amit Varma]: In those days, nothing now. Nothing now, yeah. So, tell me a little bit about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what it means to a community to have such a deep sense of history that you
[Amit Varma]: can trace yourself that far back. Like, for me, it's really difficult and I think
[Amit Varma]: for most people who are listening to this, it's difficult to go too far back beyond
[Amit Varma]: our grandfathers, right? Grandfather, great-grandfather, but that's pretty much
[Amit Varma]: where it stops. You really don't know anything. There are no records. There's no
[Amit Varma]: nothing. But it seems that within this Parsi community, you have sort of a
[Amit Varma]: history which also becomes a mythology where your ancestors, directly traceable,
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, people who are, you know, that's part of your heritage. So, what is
[Amit Varma]: that like? Like, you know, just this small community, so distinct, living in this big
[Amit Varma]: land where you're completely doffed by everyone and you have this deep sense of
[Amit Varma]: history. Tell me a little bit about what that was like. What was it like for you
[Amit Varma]: to sort of discover all of those things about your past and how did the Parsi
[Guest]: community view itself? Because it might well have changed. Well, as I said,
[Guest]: I was brought up in Bombay and Pune, which was very distinctly had the Parsi
[Guest]: influence. Then I went away to study in America. When I came back, my jobs were
[Guest]: all in Delhi. I married in Delhi. So, I wasn't really that much in touch. But, you
[Guest]: know, about, say, six years ago, the late Mr. Amit Patel, he had told me that,
[Guest]: look, I'm from Bharuch and have you been on the Parsi pilgrimage side? I said, I've
[Guest]: been years ago and I do want to go sometime again to Udwadia, etc. But I
[Guest]: went when I was a child. So, he kept insisting and I said, huh, later, later.
[Guest]: But he finally insisted that I go. And I'm so grateful to him for going there
[Guest]: because, you know, when I saw Udwada, Surat, Navsari, there were a lot of questions
[Guest]: which I'd never really thought about, including my own ancestry. Because when
[Guest]: a man asked me the question that, you know, your brother-in-law was here and he
[Guest]: claimed he was from Navsari. And I said, my brother-in-law talks a lot. How does
[Guest]: he know that we are from Navsari? Because I genuinely didn't really think about it
[Guest]: at all. And when I went back, I asked my sister and she said, yeah. And then I
[Guest]: realized that my mother's side is from Navsari. My father's side is from Surat.
[Guest]: And then I started reading some, somebody on the Facebook, when I put up
[Guest]: the photos of what I'd seen, sent me some extracts from a Parsi, Iranica,
[Guest]: Encyclopedia Iranica. And when I was looking up that, I said, my God, you know,
[Guest]: they're talking about my ancestors and Pune because they were the ones who had
[Guest]: the first Parsi fire temple in Pune. And it goes back, as you said, much further
[Guest]: to the Jamasas line. So then I started researching. And as I was researching all
[Guest]: this, I mean, it's just a fortuitous coincidence that Penguin suggested to me
[Guest]: that, would you like to write a book on the Parsis? And I believe several Bombay
[Guest]: journalists had been asked and they'd all refused. And I said, yeah, I would like to
[Guest]: write a book on the Parsis. But I didn't know what I was going to write.
[Guest]: I mean, I just kept thinking and I discovered more about my ancestry and I
[Guest]: found that there were several, you know, I knew vaguely my mother had said things.
[Guest]: Now you're talking about the long ancestral tracks of the Parsi. Well,
[Guest]: some of it is myth, not necessary. Like my mother used to say, we never took her
[Guest]: very seriously. She said that I can trace my ancestry back to Neryosang Gawal,
[Guest]: who was the original priest who was supposed to have come back in the 8th, 9th
[Guest]: century, whatever. Which, I mean, I don't think we can prove that.
[Guest]: But when I talked to Justice Rohinton Nariman, who is an expert, I'm no
[Guest]: historian or very knowledgeable, he says, no, but your mother is right that she
[Guest]: will be referring to a Neryosang Gawal who was there in, I think, the 9th or the
[Guest]: 11th century, I think. So I was wondering, how do you trace your
[Guest]: ancestry? But if you're from Navsari, it's all recorded. If you have done your
[Guest]: Navar, you know, that is when you have studied to be a priest, it's in the
[Guest]: records. So that is how they trace the ancestry.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I've been thinking about is how our conceptions of time
[Amit Varma]: change with time. Like, you know, I had a guest on the show recently who was
[Amit Varma]: Jai Arjun Singh, who writes about film, and he teaches cinema, and he was
[Amit Varma]: saying that many of my students don't know of cinema before Christopher Nolan,
[Amit Varma]: right? Everything, what had happened, happened after 2015. And that's sort of a
[Amit Varma]: certain time horizon that people have. And I think of myself like I'm 48, and I
[Amit Varma]: remember when I was like 20, I used to think that 40 is so old, yeah? Who wants
[Amit Varma]: to live that long? You know, and for me, you know, time would have that quality
[Amit Varma]: where everything in a little bit in the future is in the distant future. And I'm
[Amit Varma]: so much just in the present and what happened yesterday matters so much. And
[Amit Varma]: with time, that has expanded. So now, you know, when I think of time, when I look
[Amit Varma]: back on my own life, it's a larger span of time. And it seems that as we grow
[Amit Varma]: older, obviously, the way we look at time changes, because if I'm 48, it makes me
[Amit Varma]: realize that something that happened, say, 48 years before I was born, doesn't seem
[Amit Varma]: that distant anymore. And in your case, and in the case of many historians who've
[Amit Varma]: been on the show, it goes even further back, because you study history, and one
[Amit Varma]: you realize that these years haven't taken so long to pass, even from 1600 to
[Amit Varma]: now, if you think about it, over the span of this thing, it doesn't feel so long as
[Amit Varma]: it would have, say, when I was 15 years old. So how do you, in that sense, think
[Amit Varma]: about time? And you know, does that change perspectives? Like, for example, a young
[Amit Varma]: person today, born today will have like a fixed notion of India. And then as she
[Amit Varma]: lives, and as the years go by, it'll expand, the more you look at history, the
[Amit Varma]: more it expands, perhaps beyond a particular point, it dissolves. Like if
[Amit Varma]: you read Tony Joseph's book on ancient Indians, you realize that, you know, 5000
[Amit Varma]: years back, everything is so diffuse, so different. So over time, how have your
[Amit Varma]: notions of time changed? And do you look back on past events differently? Like, do
[Amit Varma]: you look back at, do you look back on your parents now, for example, and see
[Amit Varma]: them with a different eye than what you, you know, how you saw them there, where
[Amit Varma]: they might have just been, you know, you might have seen them within the context
[Amit Varma]: of that relationship. But today, they are just part of a society, part of a point
[Guest]: in time, all of that.
[Guest]: No, I wouldn't say it's quite like that. But I think the first 20 years of the, of
[Guest]: your life, they're momentous, because you're growing into adulthood and all
[Guest]: that. So that stays with you a very long time. But as you get older, you know, the
[Guest]: concept of time is not so heavy. What, you know, when you are a kid, somebody
[Guest]: who's one year older than you or two years older feels like a big difference,
[Guest]: they were another thing. And now, you know, age doesn't become such a big
[Guest]: factor. And I think I know a lot of people say that you get traumatized when you
[Guest]: pass 50, or you get traumatized when you pass 60. But I'm quite matter of fact
[Guest]: about these things. So I just carried about, carried on, maybe because I also
[Guest]: have a lot of young friends that have never felt my age that much. I mean, my
[Guest]: bridge group is a bit older than me. So I, it doesn't really affect me that way.
[Guest]: And that I don't think of myself as although I know I'm very, very old, is
[Guest]: the fact that sometimes unconsciously, for example, in a plane or a bus, I get
[Guest]: up to give somebody else the place. And then I say, Hey, why am I doing that? I'm
[Guest]: actually much older.
[Amit Varma]: So let's go back to your childhood. Tell me about what growing up in those days,
[Amit Varma]: 40s, 50s, Bombay was like India was like, give me a sense of the texture of your
[Amit Varma]: days. How would you spend your time? What was school like?
[Guest]: Well, see, I went it was a very different time. I was just after I'm around a
[Guest]: midnight child, you know, 46 December, we went most of my I've been traveling
[Guest]: around also, as I said, my father's in the government, most of my time was
[Guest]: spent in Bombay. And I, my father insisted we go to the school Fort
[Guest]: Convent of Jesus and Mary, which was his grandmother, his mother, my
[Guest]: grandmother was among the first students as one. I think it's about the oldest
[Guest]: school in Bombay. So and it was such a different atmosphere that I have to what
[Guest]: you see in Delhi today that I mean, coming to Delhi was a total eye opener
[Guest]: for me, because there must have been less than 20 people in a class. And if
[Guest]: you look at the communities, I would say the majority community may have been
[Guest]: Catholic than Jews, because a lot of Jews had come from the war, because of
[Guest]: the World War, they had migrated, and some had come from Baghdad. And we had a
[Guest]: lot of Parsis. And I joke with tell my friends in Delhi, they had, I said, we
[Guest]: always looked upon the Muslims and Hindus as you know, the old hands in the
[Guest]: school. And frankly, we never had any any concept of caste. It was not a thing.
[Guest]: I told you when I came to Delhi that I saw a completely different world. I my
[Guest]: sister jokes that in her generation, for example, that only the few Parsis went
[Guest]: to college, most of them became either secretaries or went into the airlines or
[Guest]: got married. It wasn't so in my time, all the girls in my class, though, we were
[Guest]: not the school did not fit us out, actually all did very well for this for
[Guest]: ourselves. But it was a totally different world. One thing was very common in my
[Guest]: school that if you are good looking, in those days, there's no such thing as
[Guest]: professional modeling. But they used to join the airlines, usually Air India in
[Guest]: those days. And you had part time modeling jobs with Air India. And we used
[Guest]: to joke because all the pretty girls, they did very well for themselves. They
[Guest]: married very rich men, because I think in those days the planes were small or
[Guest]: whatever they met. Parmeshwar Godrej was in my class, for example. And there were
[Guest]: others who also. So a lot of it wasn't taken automatically as it is today that
[Guest]: you'll go to college. A lot of after passing our senior Cambridge, even before
[Guest]: joining college, I mean, of course, I did join college, but we all did this
[Guest]: shorthand and typing, which stands you in good stead in journalism. But I
[Guest]: should notice none of later generations have those skills. We were just thought
[Guest]: of as automatic in our times. And I also found that a school which is a convent
[Guest]: school. I tell my children because I didn't send them to one, but I can tell
[Guest]: straight away which of your friends in college were from a convent because
[Guest]: there's so much politer, graceful. It's not a me first atmosphere in those days.
[Guest]: You know, it was Pehle Aap Pehle Aap sort of thing. It was quite a revelation.
[Guest]: Maybe my school was different, actually. I think the school was also different
[Guest]: because when I went to college, I found girls from other and were saying, how
[Guest]: much did you get in your marks? And oh, I should have got more. And, you know, the
[Guest]: way we were ladylike, the way we were brought up, we were always told, no, no, no,
[Guest]: I should have got less, you should have been, you know, that style. So that was a
[Amit Varma]: different world. So when you were a schoolgirl, what was your view of
[Amit Varma]: yourself? Like today, I think many people who are in school, like you correctly say,
[Amit Varma]: would assume that they're going to go to college, would already start. No, I would
[Guest]: have gone to college. I know that because of the family I came from. But I really
[Guest]: had no idea what I wanted to do. Actually, I wanted to be an artist, odd as it
[Guest]: sounds. I don't even think I had the skill. I am a journalist, partially by
[Guest]: accident, really, because I went to college. My father was traditional,
[Guest]: thought that best thing is to have a doctor in the family and you should go
[Guest]: in for science. And my airy-fairy school, I mean, they changed. I didn't even have
[Guest]: physics and chemistry in my twelfth year. But he insisted that I take up science,
[Guest]: whereas everyone else who had come, I'd learn. So I did it for two years and I
[Guest]: wanted to switch. I mean, then you go in for medical. Most of my friends went in
[Guest]: for medical. I couldn't bear this dissection. And I wasn't, my families are
[Guest]: all mathematical, but I am not. So it was a total misfit. But I finished my BSc
[Guest]: because my father said, you have to do it. And he was a strict Victorian type of a
[Guest]: person, so that we didn't really question. And you were also into sports, I
[Guest]: believe. Yeah, how did you know that? One hears things. No, I mean, in our little
[Guest]: circles, yes, I was very fond of sports. Not that we had so many sports, but I was
[Guest]: a sprinter and I played badminton, table tennis, things like that. And what are
[Amit Varma]: the kind of, like, books you would read or music you would listen to? Well, I
[Guest]: like to read, you know, the usual English 1920th century novels. Not, I'm afraid,
[Guest]: modern literature in those days, we weren't exposed to. Whatever was in the
[Guest]: house, we read. Jane Oscar Wilde, Dickens, that sort of stuff, Scott. You
[Amit Varma]: mentioned you wanted to be an artist. So, like, what kind of artist? And were you
[Guest]: also drawn to writing at this point? Or is that something that happened later? No, not at all.
[Guest]: I wasn't even very particularly attracted to English or any such thing.
[Guest]: Actually, when I was, after I had done my degree, you know, those who weren't
[Guest]: gravitating to the airlines, a lot of the, in those days in Bombay, among our
[Guest]: circles, it was very common to go into the airlines. Not airlines, I'm
[Guest]: sorry, into advertising. And I thought I might be quite good with words. I mean,
[Guest]: copy. I didn't know whether I was or not. So, but of course, I wasn't a good-looking
[Guest]: girl. And all the people who were in advertising were all very smart and well
[Guest]: turned out. And I was a nerdy type of a person. Any case, my mom said, okay, if you
[Guest]: are interested in advertising, I have a friend who runs an agency. You go and see
[Guest]: her. That was the artist, the sculptor, Pilu Pochkhannawala. So, she said, why are
[Guest]: you going for advertising? Everyone goes for advertising. You should go in for
[Guest]: journalism. And I was so impressionable. I said, okay. So, instead of taking the
[Guest]: course, which I was just about to do in advertising, I took the course in
[Guest]: journalism. Just very, I mean, accidental. It shows I wasn't very committed or
[Guest]: anything. And then just one thing led to another. My father was certain that all
[Guest]: his children should go abroad to study. So, then after finishing my diploma year,
[Guest]: I applied for a course in journalism and went there. Once you've got those
[Guest]: degrees, you think that you obviously should follow the line you've taken.
[Guest]: Though if it was in today's world where you have career guidance and things like
[Guest]: that, everyone would have said, no way should you have taken up journalism. I
[Guest]: didn't have, I don't have any of the characteristics we should normally. My
[Guest]: English wasn't that great. I'm a rather shy and a retiring person. So, I see
[Guest]: these young girls and I'm so impressed. I'm embarrassed if I have to ask twice
[Guest]: somebody, you know, if I have to contact somebody and they rebuff you, I don't
[Guest]: like to ask for the second time. So, I'm not the best person at all. But it was
[Guest]: early days in the profession and I got the breaks. And I've always been hard
[Guest]: working and conscientious and a lot of luck. Everything in life is lots of luck
[Guest]: also. To be at the right place at the right time for the right story, the right
[Guest]: job.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you went to Boston University, which is where you studied
[Amit Varma]: journalism. So, what was that like, you know, going to a foreign country?
[Guest]: It was a total eye-opener. Because I think even to some extent today, but in
[Guest]: those days, totally what you studied was all rote, you know, there was no
[Guest]: thinking. And here you were exposed to a totally different world where
[Guest]: everything was, which I do, I realized I had an aptitude for and I was very,
[Guest]: very underconfident. But I realized I was getting excellent A grades in
[Guest]: everything, because it was a totally different style of studying, which I
[Guest]: could relate to, which meant researching in a library, you know, looking up
[Guest]: facts, writing. So, it also gave me a lot of confidence.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me something about even up till the 90s, and I was a journalist in
[Amit Varma]: the aughties. And one, there weren't so many journalism courses locally. And
[Amit Varma]: two people who did learn journalism, maybe on the job or otherwise, they
[Amit Varma]: learned the functional aspects of it, how you write, how you report a story,
[Amit Varma]: all of those things. But they sometimes don't have that big picture view that
[Amit Varma]: you know, what are the values of journalism? What are the ethics that you
[Amit Varma]: need to internalize while being a journalist? You know, why do you pick
[Amit Varma]: one story over another? Why do you handle one story in a particular way
[Amit Varma]: than some other kind of way? So, was there some of that, you know, so when
[Amit Varma]: you actually did that journalism course in Boston, you know, what was that
[Amit Varma]: education like? What were you learning, which you perhaps did not know earlier?
[Amit Varma]: Or in what way did it expand your view?
[Guest]: It expanded my view, generally, of research and finding and all the usual,
[Guest]: you know, things about the storyline, and appealing to the reader. You pick
[Guest]: up all that along the way, but I think you even in the profession, you know, I
[Guest]: was in the Indian Express at that time, it was a very old fashioned paper. So
[Guest]: people just go went along as they went along. And I must give all credit that
[Guest]: when I went to India today, and Arun Puri, who is an outsider, not from the
[Guest]: journalist background at all, but he was the owner. He taught me more than I
[Guest]: learnt in all these years of, as far as the craft of journalism is concerned,
[Guest]: than I had in my earlier newspapers, which was the Motherland and the Indian
[Guest]: Express, because then what is it's just a streamlined, you know, you take what
[Guest]: is come, nobody questions, why did you give that lead? Why did you give that?
[Guest]: What do you think the reader will want? How will you cut down, you know, the
[Guest]: word count, it matters. It's not there, the word count in newspapers used to be
[Guest]: that, if it's too long, just the end is cut. Nobody gave it any thought. It was
[Guest]: in India today that I learned these things about how important the word
[Guest]: count is, how you should make your story fit into that word count, taught you
[Guest]: about what the reader really wants, you know, not what is, I know everyone
[Guest]: talks about the lead, but it opened my eyes to a lot of things. And it sometimes
[Guest]: needs an outsider to tell you how to see your profession well.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit more about this, because I find it very interesting in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that in all the professions that I have been in, one, I have kind of
[Amit Varma]: come from the outside myself, not really been an insider. And two, I think the
[Amit Varma]: advantage of being an outsider is that you're not bound by those conventions,
[Guest]: and you don't settle into those familiar groups.
[Guest]: Exactly. I feel an outsider's input can be very, very valuable compared to
[Guest]: people who have got into a rut and a groove and just, you know, coast along.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about that period. I mean, we'll go back to the
[Amit Varma]: chronological narrative later. But just to sort of dive in, when you say that
[Amit Varma]: when you went to India today, he...
[Guest]: It was a fortnightly in those days, but there was a lot more research of facts,
[Guest]: far more research, you know, with a newspaper, you just rattle off what the
[Guest]: story you have, speed is of the essence, and you don't bother to check, recheck
[Guest]: so much. And you don't give the intro that much thought. You don't think what
[Guest]: are people thinking, you don't look at the visual appeal of a story, you know,
[Guest]: things like boxes and all that, that all came later. When we were in the
[Guest]: newspaper in the early days, you know, the stories were all in the form of what
[Guest]: do you call them? They weren't box... they didn't... I don't know the right
[Guest]: word to use. But it was like, what do you call it?
[Unknown]: Block of text.
[Amit Varma]: No, like a seven upturned.
[Amit Varma]: Ah, right.
[Guest]: Okay. And... Just a long string. Whereas, you know, now, if you look at a
[Guest]: newspaper makeup, there's so much more to it. That wasn't the... when I, I
[Guest]: myself was in charge of a newspaper in Sunday Mail. I fortunately had with me a
[Guest]: girl who had done the art of layouts from abroad. And there you got so much
[Guest]: perspective about the display of a story, you know, the boxes of a story, the
[Guest]: photographs of a story, not just all bunched together.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think it made a difference that to begin with, it was a fortnightly?
[Amit Varma]: Because I think what happens in journalism is that it is not one
[Amit Varma]: monolithic thing. If you work at a daily, like you pointed out, you often don't
[Amit Varma]: have time to go deep, you're expected to do one or two stories a day, you're just
[Amit Varma]: filing, filing, filing. Whereas if you're in a monthly, for example, to go to the
[Amit Varma]: other kind of possible extreme, then you have all the time in the world. If you're
[Amit Varma]: writing a book, you have even more time where you can really go deep. So do you
[Amit Varma]: think that, you know, looking back that you you, you know, you mentioned that one
[Amit Varma]: of the things about India today was it was a fortnightly, that that matters? And
[Amit Varma]: do you think that sometimes in modern times, like I had another journalist on
[Amit Varma]: the show recently, Samar Bansal, and we were talking a lot about journalism and
[Amit Varma]: the values of journalism. And, you know, in modern times, his lament was that
[Amit Varma]: journalists are sort of chasing content. They are not, you know, that deeper
[Amit Varma]: thinking about reporting stories and thinking about it, taking a step back,
[Amit Varma]: thinking about a story, letting it breathe, you know, not going in with a
[Amit Varma]: pre decided narrative that this is what it is, and all of that. And he's saying
[Amit Varma]: that doesn't happen much. Today, everyone is taking cues from Twitter or
[Amit Varma]: whatever, you know, the news cycle has become shorter and shorter. And it's
[Amit Varma]: become a content game and no one is thinking more deeply.
[Guest]: It depends on the medium rather than the times because I know one thing very,
[Guest]: very frustrating about India today was that it was a fortnightly and you always
[Guest]: living in the tension that your story was going to break, you know, even if you
[Guest]: had exclusive fact, it would be reported by a newspaper before yours came out,
[Guest]: especially when it's a fortnightly, even with a weekly that tension is there. So
[Guest]: in that sense, for a newspaper person, which I think I basically am, it that was
[Guest]: a very unhappy part of it. But I just said certain tricks of the trade, you
[Guest]: know, aspects that, yes, you did think more deeply about a story. You didn't
[Guest]: just rattle it off the first thing that came to your mind. You first did think
[Guest]: more deeply before you actually sat down on the typewriter to write. But it could
[Guest]: be very frustrating. Like I remember Indira Gandhi assassination, for example,
[Guest]: I had such exclusive information about the actual how the, you know, security
[Guest]: angle and the killing, etc. And for some reason, India today insisted on first
[Guest]: putting out the copy at the fortnightly, which was already in the print run. So by
[Guest]: the time we came out, we were so late, it was a collector's item. But I mean, so
[Guest]: many I saw so many of my exclusive facts one by one coming out in the Statesman
[Guest]: and it was heartbreaking, you know, for journalists to see that your information
[Guest]: and that's the disadvantage of working in a magazine.
[Amit Varma]: So let's go back to, you know, the chronology of your life as it were, you
[Amit Varma]: done journalism from Boston, you came back here. At that point, were you, I
[Amit Varma]: mean, I know it's a silly question, because after all, you did a course in
[Amit Varma]: journalism. But were you thinking of actually being a journalist for the rest
[Guest]: of your life?
[Guest]: Yes, I was. I'm that type of person.
[Amit Varma]: So how did it go from there? Like you ended up in motherland?
[Guest]: Yeah, see, I was in Bombay, I applied for jobs, in times, the very limited
[Guest]: number of newspapers in there. So in the Express, there were two times and in an
[Guest]: Express. I don't think they wanted women, actually. Oh, there were no, there were
[Guest]: very, very few women. And the women who were there usually had tremendous pull
[Guest]: of some sort or the other.
[Guest]: Well, when I saw I wasn't getting a job, I mean, Mrs. Ewing, Gulshan Ewing, she
[Guest]: was very kind to me. And she kept letting me write for Eves Weekly. And she
[Guest]: encouraged me, even Khushwant Singh in Illustrated encouraged me and said, No,
[Guest]: no, you do this, though I just become raw. But the newspapers were not
[Guest]: interested. They didn't even bother to reply. They didn't want women, they had
[Guest]: their own pool from which they selected that, you know, journalists. Times had a
[Guest]: school, had an exam, Times of India had an exam. But, you know, since I'd come
[Guest]: back from there, I hadn't thought of sitting. And it was again, I was from
[Guest]: Delhi. It was again an accident. My brother in law was a politician, Subramanian
[Guest]: Swami. And he said, Why don't I've got the perfect job for you. There's a new
[Guest]: newspaper starting in Delhi, and they're willing to take you. And that new
[Guest]: newspaper was called, it was being started by the RSS. It was called the
[Guest]: Motherland. And I was this person from Bombay who had very little idea of
[Guest]: anything about the Hindutva movement, about RSS, Jansan, my general knowledge
[Guest]: was quite poor. But I wasn't at all political. But being put, thrown into the
[Guest]: deep end into a newspaper, which is just starting, was a great, great
[Guest]: advantage. Because A, this was a newspaper, unlike the few others, which
[Guest]: I later realized, there was far too few people for anyone to say that because
[Guest]: I'm a woman, I'll not do night duty, that I won't do the crime beat. I just
[Guest]: had to do everything. And not only that, I had a chief reporter who wanted to
[Guest]: get rid of me. So he would send me on three different assignments on the same
[Guest]: days. So frankly, my entire salary went on transport. I was fortunate enough
[Guest]: that I was staying with my sister. So that was okay. But I mean, he was just
[Guest]: trying to push me out. And I gained so much experience because there were
[Guest]: women in other newspapers in Delhi, but it was usually one woman per
[Guest]: newspaper. And those women were always doing the feature stories, the flower
[Guest]: show, the zoo stories, cost of living, and not the hard news. But I got the
[Guest]: head start because I covered everything. And though I must confess, I have a
[Guest]: disadvantage, which I have to this day. I don't know how, after all these years
[Guest]: I've managed. My Hindi was never, it's what you call Bombay Hindi. But I
[Guest]: managed. So I covered the corporation and all. And with my American training,
[Guest]: I gave a little spin to these stories. So actually, I came in close quarters
[Guest]: with all these people, hardcore RSS people, but they were all very kind and
[Guest]: helpful. And they didn't seem to resent my background or my lack of Hindi
[Guest]: speaking abilities.
[Amit Varma]: So number of things I want to kind of dive deeper into and one of them is you
[Amit Varma]: point out that with your training, you used to give a little spin to stories
[Amit Varma]: that you did by which I mean, the way I would interpret that is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a typical reporter would look at a story in a particular way, but you would
[Amit Varma]: manage to do something different with it. So can you maybe elaborate on?
[Guest]: Yes, I'll give you two examples in motherland, for example. One day, they
[Guest]: sent me to do a story about a missing schoolteacher in crime. So I did it like,
[Guest]: you know, normally a crime reported as so and so missing blah, blah, blah,
[Guest]: blah, blah, blah, mother at home, what is in there. I did like a story. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, you come back abroad. And the crime reporter said they're all the
[Guest]: other crime reports are asking in Delhi, who the hell is this girl writing all
[Guest]: this nonsense, you know, giving it a human angle going and interviewing the
[Guest]: people at home. Whereas normally they just took the facts from the police
[Guest]: office as to what was happening. I spent my money, went to, in an off-road
[Guest]: rickshaw to the North Delhi, talked to everyone, the neighbors, which they weren't used to.
[Guest]: They couldn't afford to also because it was, in those days, transport was terrible in Delhi.
[Guest]: But I did try to put as much as I could into the story.
[Guest]: Also in the corporation, it was a question of who said what, he said what.
[Guest]: So I used to try and give it a sarcastic tone and bring out that here's this man claiming that
[Guest]: he's a loyal Jansangi to his last breath and the next day he's defected to the Congress and,
[Guest]: you know, sort of tongue in cheek. And I found, actually, people quite appreciated
[Guest]: this tongue in cheek reporting of political events. And nobody stopped me from doing it either,
[Guest]: you know, in Motherland. That was also a very good experience, actually,
[Guest]: because I would never have got that head start experience in any other newspaper,
[Guest]: the major newspapers in Delhi. I would never have been given that chance.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit more about Motherland, like, you know, if it was like it was set up in a sense so
[Amit Varma]: that the Jansang or the RSS or whatever could, you know, get its view, get its view across to
[Guest]: an English audience. Get its view across because English
[Guest]: newspapers were, frankly, in those days, the only ones that were taken seriously.
[Guest]: And there was no official censorship. But the truth is, today the situation is bad. I mean,
[Guest]: the government tries to impose what it's thinking on the media. But in those days also, you were
[Guest]: not considered respectable if you did not toe the government line. And it was very much, Mrs. Gandhi
[Guest]: said this today and so-and-so said that today. You didn't question. And newspapers weren't
[Guest]: questioning at all in those days. They were taking what the government gave them.
[Guest]: So it was lovely to be in the only opposition paper, which was, you know, it was very infringing
[Guest]: to work for it. There were people in the newspaper who, when they asked for an appointment,
[Guest]: did not mention the name of the newspaper. I did. I always mentioned. And I got away with it.
[Guest]: I do remember once that I was doing a story on, it was before the Bangladesh war,
[Guest]: and I'd gone to see Padma Janaidu. It was a very favorable, it was going to be obviously
[Guest]: favorable and she was collecting material for the refugees. And a secretary had given me the time.
[Guest]: And the moment you heard that I was working for the motherland,
[Guest]: she said, I will not speak to you, et cetera, you know, and it was very rude.
[Guest]: But that secretary was embarrassed, but I, it was part of the game. I,
[Guest]: so, I mean, you were not, you were considered, looked at with suspicion because to be
[Guest]: on that side of the fence was not considered. I was on nobody's side. I was just doing my
[Guest]: job and nobody told me what way to write or not. But as I said,
[Guest]: I had the opportunity to do a lot of beats and a lot of stories, which I would not have had to
[Guest]: been able to do in what were considered then the mainline papers, Times, Statesman, Indian Express,
[Amit Varma]: Patriot. And I guess in terms of learning the craft, they would have been both a pro and a con.
[Amit Varma]: And the con would have been that perhaps you don't have experienced journalists guiding you and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, helping you out, but the pro would have been that you can write about anything,
[Guest]: whereas in the other papers. Oh, definitely. They were all clear cut.
[Guest]: And as a woman, I, you know, they boxed you into a corner and that was my very great advantage
[Guest]: because when I first came to the, it was just one woman, it was basically one woman
[Guest]: per newspaper or two at the most. And they did not cover hard news.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about that aspect of it, women in journalism. You know, another of my guests,
[Amit Varma]: Sujata Anandan, who started much later than you, I think in the mid 80s was when she really got into
[Amit Varma]: reporting. And I had done an episode with her on Maharashtra politics, which was very illuminating.
[Amit Varma]: And she pointed out that in her time as well, she was the only woman doing hard news.
[Amit Varma]: It was just expected that women will do features, they'll do soft stories, they'll do culture,
[Amit Varma]: they'll do all of that. So, how did the way women function in journalism, you know, evolve with time
[Amit Varma]: through the years that you were there, you know, beginning perhaps with there being no barriers
[Amit Varma]: about what you can or cannot cover, you can do crime, you can do politics, you can do anything.
[Amit Varma]: And moving on from there to something that, you know, you would also have been part of later in
[Amit Varma]: time where women become the bosses, they become the editors, they become the mentors, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me a little bit about that journey through the ages and how it changed, what were
[Guest]: the flips which made a change and so on. Well, I would say that when I came to Delhi first,
[Guest]: that women were very clearly slotted. I was an unusual case because I was in this new newspaper,
[Guest]: which one man was trying to show that I should be thrown out much then chief reporter.
[Guest]: And for the rest, there were just very few hands. So, there was no question of being given any kind
[Guest]: of special favors at all about. When I joined the Indian Express, all the male reporters looked at
[Guest]: me very hostile and said, you're going to do night duty because the other girl wasn't. I said, yeah,
[Guest]: of course, I'm going to do night duty. I've always been doing night duty. Also, the men were keeping
[Guest]: women out by using this night duty bogey. A news editor, Mr. Saxena said, no, we can't have women
[Guest]: because they don't do night duty. So, they're disadvantaged. And why can't you do night duty?
[Guest]: They claimed that we came under the Factories Act and under the Factories Act, I have to go home
[Guest]: by a certain time or whatever. I think as far as women coming into the mainstream of newspapers,
[Guest]: Delhi and the English language newspapers were much ahead. I know what trouble I had nothing
[Guest]: to face compared to what when I went to Bombay, girls from the Marathi newspapers told me.
[Guest]: They were treated so shabbily, so badly. And how did this start to change?
[Guest]: As far as I was concerned, maybe by my temperament or whatever, I was never really treated very
[Guest]: differently from men. So, I was always from the beginning and all because of the circumstances
[Guest]: in the main. But also see now in Express, then there were two women, not one when I joined.
[Guest]: So, now you're not going to give special favors of not doing late night, etc.
[Guest]: And then I think the women also started to say that we want to cover beats. And once you have
[Guest]: more than one, you know, you break a barrier because there were women on the desk, but not
[Amit Varma]: in reporting generally. One of the laments that I hear from women and a very justified lament
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, that they work in a world which is designed by men for men. The classic
[Amit Varma]: example being, of course, air conditioning, that air conditioning evolved in the 1950s where
[Amit Varma]: it was mainly men in offices. And therefore, the temperatures were set at a particular 21 degrees
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. And women's bodies work differently and women find that too cold. Now, that's just
[Amit Varma]: that's a good metaphor. But more than that, you know, there are so many concrete ways in which
[Amit Varma]: a workplace is designed or work routines are designed, that you unthinkingly design it in
[Amit Varma]: a particular way, which leaves someone out like the journalist Nikita Saxena was on my show a
[Amit Varma]: few years ago when we spoke about Me Too. And she works for Caravan. I don't know where she is now.
[Amit Varma]: And she pointed out that when she would go out on the field reporting, for her, it was a big deal
[Amit Varma]: that in some hotels where you stayed, you couldn't lock the door from inside, you had that automatic
[Amit Varma]: click click, but you didn't have a separate kundi, which basically means that anytime at any time of
[Amit Varma]: the night, someone could just open the door. And I've spoken to other guests subsequently who would
[Amit Varma]: say things like, you know, every time we were sleeping in a hotel room somewhere, I would take
[Amit Varma]: my chair and I would put it there and I would just you know, block it just you know, and she said it
[Amit Varma]: might seem paranoid if you're a man listening to this, but it was just something that you did,
[Amit Varma]: because women had this extra layer of things that they need to be aware of. So what was it like for
[Guest]: you in that sense? Like, well, I'll tell you for one thing, neither in the 50s, I was in the 70s,
[Guest]: there was no air conditioning in the next room. But that was just a metaphor. But I'll tell you what
[Guest]: there was from the beginning, which was there, there was no women's toilet in the motherland,
[Guest]: there was no question of that there. So I just had to walk in and without looking left or right,
[Guest]: and you know, and there'd be people on the outside, you just had to get used to that.
[Guest]: For that matter, for years, when I was covering Parliament, the only women's loo was in the MP
[Guest]: side, which you can't go down the stairs and somewhere else. So I mean, what do you do? You
[Guest]: just walk in, enter the loo and go out, you know, because there were no separate loos.
[Guest]: The Indian Express loos were terrible, but there was a loo for women. But what a difference in the
[Guest]: loos that you see today when you travel in newspaper offices and the loos in those days.
[Guest]: I think the loo was the real thing that women had to put up with things like that. Because
[Guest]: air conditioning, I think, I didn't know that it made such a difference whether you're a woman or
[Amit Varma]: a man. And we didn't have air conditioning at all. That's like a first world metaphor.
[Guest]: We didn't have air conditioning really for that. But things like the loo was there and you said
[Guest]: about this lady traveling. Well, you know, mostly when I travel, I didn't have this latch problem.
[Guest]: Maybe I was in places where there was a latch. But I know that once or twice,
[Guest]: we very often traveled if you went to, I didn't go that much to very small towns. But when you
[Guest]: went with the photographers, there was no alternative. There's only one room you had to
[Guest]: share, you know. So a conservative person might have felt, you know, that it's not on.
[Guest]: But yeah, you have to do what you have to do.
[Guest]: You have to do what you have to do.
[Amit Varma]: So another sort of meta question, which is really about the question of how newspapers decide what
[Amit Varma]: to report on, how one decides what story one should do. And typically what happens is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a newsroom may get into a particular groove, a particular way of looking at something.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I had a guest on the show Samarth Bansal, who objected to the word newsworthy,
[Amit Varma]: where he said that, you know, we really need to examine what that word means.
[Amit Varma]: So just that sort of larger question of taking a step back and thinking about why are we reporting
[Amit Varma]: what we are reporting? What is the way in which we should report it? When you entered the profession,
[Amit Varma]: did you find perhaps in your editors where it should really have come from? You know,
[Amit Varma]: that kind of thinking where you take a step back or do you just enter a space where there's a
[Amit Varma]: particular way of doing things and you just continue and you get the stories out and all of that?
[Guest]: You know, all these phrases you use, we never had the luxury of at all that you could sit with
[Guest]: these fine sounding concepts. The way it worked in newspapers in the old days was, there were
[Guest]: reporters, there were two lots of newsgatherers. There was a caste system, there was three-way
[Guest]: caste system. There were the reporters, the lowest of the low. They did the local stories
[Guest]: and every morning the chief reporter came and wrote down, you'll do this, you'll do this,
[Guest]: this is your beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat, beat. You didn't sit to question
[Guest]: or not question, you just went to do it and get it. Then number two caste was the bureau.
[Guest]: So, they covered parliament, they covered the politicians. So, you know, I was so lowly that
[Guest]: once I was asked that, Pramila Kallan asked me, what would you like to be eventually?
[Guest]: I said, I'd love to be in the bureau, special correspondent. You know, we didn't have that
[Guest]: many options or ambitions in those days and there were editors. Now, these editors are
[Guest]: very strange type of editors because they sat in their ivory tower chambers and wrote the edits for
[Guest]: the day. But they didn't mix, they had a morning meeting, but most of them, not all of them,
[Guest]: there were exceptions. Arun Shourie was an exception, Kuldeep Nair was an exception.
[Guest]: And one of my favorite editors and chiefs, Mulgaonkar, he was totally the ivory tower
[Guest]: editor. He never bothered to know who was in his staff or anything. The editors had their
[Guest]: meeting and they decided what was going to be the line and wrote those edits. They didn't interact.
[Guest]: They didn't tell, you know, and the caste system was so complete that even if your stories were
[Guest]: very good in the reporter section, you never got a byline and your stories automatically went on
[Guest]: page three and the bureau may be having the most boring routine parliamentary coverage, but go on
[Guest]: one. Why? Because it was, you know, they were number two in the thing. And of course, the
[Guest]: editors didn't write on the news pages, they just did their edit. So, it was a wholly different type
[Guest]: of caste system. That is as much as women entering the profession was also the change that came about.
[Guest]: And I think and this whole idea, you know, about introducing a feature-ish touch, an element of not
[Guest]: just the bare facts of the news, but giving the interesting slant. It didn't have to be just in
[Guest]: what they call feature stories like going to the zoo or the it had to be even in your everyday
[Guest]: stories began to change. And I think that change came around after the emergency in 1977. India
[Guest]: today, before I joined it, they had helped this trend, you know, to give a lot more information,
[Guest]: a lot more interviews connected with news stories, give dimensions to the news.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess having this being a fortnightly having the space would have kind of helped
[Guest]: with that because it certainly had an effect impact on other newspapers slowly as well.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me more about what working at the Express was like that I would imagine that one,
[Amit Varma]: you've been thrown into an environment where there are many more people that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the pace of work is a certain way and all of that. But there's also more structure to
[Amit Varma]: what you're doing. So, what were those days like? Like, what were your big learnings during that?
[Guest]: They were very exciting, because it was also a very exciting time in history, I would say.
[Guest]: As I said, in my motherland, I was covering the opposition, which was in a way good. You didn't
[Guest]: have to check your facts too much. You know, you knew you could write anything against the
[Guest]: government. I mean, within a certain modicum, you didn't have to think that much. But Indian
[Guest]: Express suddenly, when I joined it, was also against the government. It wasn't earlier.
[Guest]: It had just started. Ramnathji had supported JP movement. So, we were moving towards
[Guest]: that direction, which gave us a much greater scope. These other people couldn't write,
[Guest]: they didn't write anything except the government line of view of things in general.
[Guest]: That's why this new group started WhatsApp group with veteran journalists on it.
[Guest]: And I was quite amused to see that how they thought in the good old days, how wonderful
[Guest]: the editors were, because they were writing, must have been writing wonderful editor.
[Guest]: They never questioned anything that was happening in the government, which is so different from what
[Guest]: it is today, you know. Maybe again today, now we are not questioning. So, Indian Express had
[Guest]: that luxury. It was a very exciting time to be there. Then the emergency came. Then the
[Guest]: post-emergency is when there was a real boom in news. Suddenly, newspaper magazines like India
[Guest]: Today and Sunday were coming out, which was changing the whole view and changing the newspapers
[Amit Varma]: as well. And how were you evolving as a journalist during this time? Like in the sense, what was your
[Amit Varma]: beat when you were at Indian Express? And how were your ambitions also evolving? Like, did you at
[Amit Varma]: some sometimes, did you feel restrained by what you were doing and wanted to do more? How were
[Guest]: you sort of? All I know is that when I joined, I by a fluke, I went with a whole lot of clippings
[Guest]: to the editor who had just come, Mulgaonkar. And he said, I think he liked them. So, he said,
[Guest]: yeah, I'll take you. I said, I'll be happy to join because it was a jump up from Motherland
[Guest]: to Indian Express. I can't take less than I'm earning. He says, no, no, I'll give you more.
[Guest]: So, I was thrilled when I saw the salary. You see, in those days, our salaries were pittances.
[Guest]: It was a question of whether you're getting five rupees more, 10 rupees more between the next man
[Guest]: or 40 rupees more, perhaps. The rest of the reporters, they were out with their knives for
[Guest]: me because my salary had become higher than most of them, all of them, practically. So,
[Guest]: then Express, it was another very good thing for journalists' career in that it had a very
[Guest]: high turnover rate. Because in times of India, you were there, you were there for life. People
[Guest]: who are reporters didn't ever become bureau or if they became right at the end of their careers.
[Guest]: Whereas Express people moved and there's really nowhere else to go. I mean, we used to joke,
[Guest]: I mean, you can't go to the National Herald or the Patriot. So, where do you go?
[Guest]: So, after the emergency, there were two, three people who became chief reporters. And I said,
[Guest]: what exactly is the criteria which you become a chief reporter? If it's salary, then I should be
[Guest]: the chief reporter. But I let it go because fortunately, one or two left, though I did think.
[Guest]: Then finally, we had a new editor, Arun Shourie, and he was the deputy news editor,
[Guest]: tipped me off. He says they're going to make somebody else the chief reporter.
[Guest]: I said, that fellow doesn't do a thing. I like him. He doesn't do hardly anything. Why should
[Guest]: he be? I know he's been there for donkey's years. So, I went and I met the chief editor,
[Guest]: the chief editor who never bothered about all these things. But I'll say he was fond of me
[Guest]: and he had hired me, Mulgaonkar. So, I said, look, I'm leaving. If he's becoming the chief,
[Guest]: he just laughs and he says, don't do anything in a hurry. We'll see. Don't worry. And they did make
[Guest]: me chief reporter, which was a big thing in those days because the first woman becoming a chief
[Guest]: reporter, etc. And what were the kind of stories you were reporting?
[Guest]: It was a very good time in the Indian Express. Arun Shourie had joined. Though, as I said,
[Guest]: I started off on the wrong note because he didn't know me. I'd been on maternity leave earlier.
[Guest]: But then I must give him all credit. He gave the reporters, as you say in Hindi, so much bhav.
[Guest]: We would suppress little people who are told to mind our places in the world. He started fighting
[Guest]: for our stories to ensure that they came on the front page. He started planning stories like the
[Guest]: Kamla case, the Bahagyalpur blindings, all those sort of stories, PILs, and doing not alone always,
[Guest]: but with teamwork. He appreciated. He understood. He had a very brilliant and I'm very grateful for
[Guest]: that because it gave us so much more confidence because I told you what was the pecking order in
[Guest]: those days. Even the story was not on the basis of the news, but who wrote it. So that opened a
[Guest]: whole new world. And he understood that actually people, majority of readers really read more of
[Guest]: what reporters write than what the bureau writes on many occasions. Delhi is a very politicized
[Guest]: city where they think that what a politician leaves one party joins another. Everyone is
[Amit Varma]: interested in. I've noticed in many professions, including journalism for the brief time that I
[Amit Varma]: was a journalist, that most people in any job, in any profession, they will get into a certain
[Amit Varma]: groove, a certain way of doing things, and then they'll just be ticking boxes and that deep
[Amit Varma]: engagement won't be there. But there are some people who are always thinking, who are always
[Amit Varma]: trying, who are always enthusiastic. They wake up in the morning, not thinking, let's get through
[Amit Varma]: the day, but they wake up thinking, yes, let's get to work, you know, and it's and you obviously
[Amit Varma]: strike me as someone who brought that attitude to the table every day, just in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your column alone and express has been going on for decades. And that's not something
[Amit Varma]: that happens by itself. So tell me something about, is it just the kind of person you are?
[Amit Varma]: Or did you also have to work at keeping your enthusiasm? Were there times that you were demoralized
[Guest]: and you said, I'm so tired. You know, I think you're either temperamentally
[Guest]: inclined to be cynical about the profession. A lot of the old timers were and I must say,
[Guest]: all the young people, I am so impressed. They're far, far better than what I was when I started
[Guest]: on because they're cocksure, which we never were. And they also have a high sense of their worth,
[Guest]: but they're very sure what they want to do. Now, in journalism, the old days were a lot of
[Guest]: very cynical old timers. Nothing's going to change. You just give in your story. They used to
[Guest]: have a joke. Well, at least, you know, when you'd come excited with a story about it,
[Guest]: they'd put you down by saying, well, at least two people are going to read that story. One of
[Guest]: those days we had the galley proof people. He's going to read your story. So don't worry, you
[Guest]: know. So that's old. They took pride in being very cynical about their jobs and that everyone was
[Guest]: exploiting them. Nowadays, the youngsters who come are very committed and they come from very,
[Guest]: you know, educational background can be very good and they move around. We had nowhere to go. So
[Guest]: some people used to think of us as the dregs, because where do you go? As I said, you go from
[Guest]: this newspaper to this. And Times was supposedly the top. Actually, to be an expert was a hundred
[Guest]: times better for my career than to ever been in Times, because I would have stagnated there
[Guest]: because there was no movement. Yeah, I find that the youngsters today, they come from much varied
[Guest]: backgrounds and they're much more thinking about the stories they do. And they're committed,
[Guest]: but I think their big flaw is they're very full of themselves. Maybe that's an old time view.
[Amit Varma]: No, no. Elaborate on that a little bit, not in a negative sense of complaining about someone,
[Amit Varma]: but if you were advising a youngster today that don't be like this, don't fall into this trap,
[Guest]: you know, what would you what would you say? I would say that you have to be a little pragmatic.
[Guest]: Now, we've run this column for how many years? It isn't that I've always managed to get everything
[Guest]: I wanted to say inside. So I've been willing to compromise to some extent and not to some
[Guest]: extent if lines are removed or something is done. But these people are prima donnas.
[Guest]: If, you know, two words are removed, they'll take offense. I think especially when you're
[Guest]: the lower levels, you have to go with, you know, your seniors decide, you know, move on.
[Guest]: Nowadays, there are many more places where you can move on to. There are all kinds of things
[Guest]: from writing for entertainment series, documentaries. There were not these openings
[Guest]: in those days. You look desperately for foreign, you know, newspaper to somebody thing to pick
[Guest]: you up. But there were very few openings for a journalist. I think one of the follies of youth,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps in any age, and I certainly, you know, can see it when I look back on myself as a young
[Amit Varma]: person, is that you think you can change the world, number one, and you think you are so good,
[Amit Varma]: you can do it all. It's a passage of time that tempers you that, you know, makes you practical,
[Amit Varma]: like you said. But also, I think one flaw that I see around me, and that's perhaps
[Amit Varma]: exacerbated by the incentives of social media and all is that young people today are much more
[Amit Varma]: judgmental. And, and you need to have a strong sense of what your values are. And it's obviously
[Amit Varma]: natural that you will condemn some things and praise others. But one needs to sort of appreciate
[Amit Varma]: the complexity of the world and not rush to judgment every time. You'd mentioned while you
[Amit Varma]: were talking about your younger self, that you were reserved, you were a little bit geeky,
[Amit Varma]: right? And being a journalist, especially being a reporter, means that you're going out all the
[Amit Varma]: time and talking to people. Yeah, right. And I have also seen that I am also an extreme introvert,
[Amit Varma]: and in a sense, just talking to people is so much effort sometimes. And because of this show,
[Amit Varma]: I've really had to kind of come out of a shell and kind of do it. What was that like? Like,
[Amit Varma]: how are you changing? Like, when you look back now, in hindsight, did you feel it made you a
[Amit Varma]: different person than you would have been then say, if you were something else, if you were a
[Guest]: banker? It's a strange thing that I noticed that when I was on the job, I lost my inhibitions,
[Guest]: because I was, you know, I had to do this. So it was ordered by me. So I had the right to be
[Guest]: cross questioning and think. But if I was on my own in a marketplace, I would think twice
[Guest]: before, not now. But in those days, I would be shy. But I noticed this extraordinary change that
[Guest]: if I felt I was on the job, you know, I would do whatever it takes. But in my personality,
[Guest]: I was not like that, that I would talk to a neighbor rather shyly or, you know, it would
[Guest]: take me time, I felt I should be introduced. Whereas journalists, most of my friends,
[Guest]: they're very good. They go up to people and say, I'm so and so from this etc. If it was for a job,
[Guest]: I do it too, I say, because I think I'm entitled to since I'm working on a story. It's a funny
[Guest]: sort of a concept. But the other point you made about this judgmentalness is I do feel
[Guest]: there's just too much judgmentalness and too much polarization
[Guest]: in our society, not just journalism as such. I don't think that's a good thing. What is happening
[Guest]: is I often find that it's now reached a stage which you write against a government,
[Guest]: they will automatically place you with whatever you write. They will not see a good story,
[Guest]: which can be pro-government. The society is polarized, journalism is polarized. Of course,
[Guest]: they have a right to be, they are bitter because they're not always allowed to express themselves
[Guest]: about very shocking facts which are going on in our country. But the sense of polarization,
[Guest]: even at the highest levels of journalism is such that there's no appreciation for the other side.
[Guest]: You know, you can have a good story on many things, but you will only see a story if you're
[Guest]: an anti-government person, you only see a good in the anti stories and vice versa, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel that there is a problem there? Like, do you feel that
[Amit Varma]: an essential quality of a journalist is the ability to not choose a tribe? I wouldn't say
[Amit Varma]: not choose a side, but the ability to not choose a tribe. Like, of course, as a journalist, you have
[Amit Varma]: values which you care about, like freedom and human dignity and all of that. And those can
[Amit Varma]: matter to you as an individual. But as a journalist, I think journalists should not pick sides in terms
[Amit Varma]: of choosing a tribe. They can have their values, which can, you know, inform whatever they write
[Amit Varma]: about. But the moment you decide that, okay, I'm on this side, or, you know, the moment you decide
[Amit Varma]: that everyone who disagrees with you is evil, everyone who works for the other side is a bad
[Guest]: person, doesn't that then affect the kind of journalism? I think it does. I think it does.
[Guest]: Which is why I think that we have lost our objectivity. You're not willing to see what
[Guest]: it is good. And that that loss of objectivity comes out. I notice it particularly when covering
[Guest]: elections. Because I'll go with some correspondents, and you'll talk to 10 people, and
[Guest]: they're giving you a clear idea of who's the winner. And yet those correspondents will say,
[Guest]: but you know, that the reason they're saying this is because they think you're from such
[Guest]: and such a background, or they're too scared to say what they really think.
[Guest]: I remember I had once gone on a trip in the days, which was Rajiv Gandhi was there,
[Guest]: but there was a very clear saffron wave in UP. And, and mind me, my Hindi is not that good. And
[Guest]: these are all Hindi experts. I went with two of them. And we went here, we went there. And it
[Guest]: was clear, they were all saying Mandir banayege. And girl who was my very good friend who was with
[Guest]: me, she was not willing to, she said, we'll go deeper into the interior, we'll get the real
[Guest]: heart speaking, which is Mayawati, she wanted the answer. We went deeper and deeper in the car was,
[Guest]: you know, punctured and whatnot. But the answer was the same, but they were not willing to accept
[Guest]: it, which is why they all got it wrong. I mean, when you don't see a wave, which is
[Guest]: tearing you in the face, then that shows that you don't have objectivity. I can understand when it's,
[Guest]: you know, election, which is a cliffhanger. But there's some elections which have been very,
[Guest]: very clear cut. And the objectivity is in seeing that. Or they rationalize when they
[Guest]: cover the election stories, rather than stick their, I find less people willing to stick their
[Guest]: neck out. And the last few elections have been very clear cut, you know, at least parliamentary
[Guest]: ones, I stopped covering assembly one, because of this bias, that you don't want to accept it
[Guest]: and wishful thinking. Which is why I think the best way to cover an electoral trend is just
[Guest]: talking to people of the pavement. Never, never, never make the mistake of going into a party
[Guest]: office. Because the party office will give you, well, there's so many percentage this cast,
[Guest]: so many percentage that cast and they will vote this way. People don't vote necessarily in cast
[Guest]: race, mostly, maybe in Bihar in some places, but generally, they also looking at various factors.
[Guest]: It never go to a party office, never go to the local journalists who are great dadas, they will
[Guest]: absolutely confuse you. Because they have their own, you know, prejudices. And because they are
[Guest]: from the area, you think that they have a valuable input to go. I think the best input is to go with
[Guest]: a clear mind and, you know, talk to the average person.
[Amit Varma]: And this cardinal journalistic danger, almost of deciding before doing the story that this is a
[Amit Varma]: story I want, and kind of looking for facts that confirm that. Do you think it's worse in present
[Amit Varma]: times in the sense that one, of course, everything is polarized. But the other sense is that one,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the media will simply not go against the government in any way, all kinds of incentives
[Amit Varma]: come into play. But a lot of the mainstream media, because they have other business interests,
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, I might own a newspaper, but I might also own a chemical factory,
[Amit Varma]: which could get raided tomorrow.
[Guest]: That's true. But when the owner is owning the publication and has other business interests,
[Guest]: then the journalist is forced to go in line if he wants to continue remaining that.
[Guest]: So that's a different aspect. It's not any prejudice, you're getting clear orders from
[Guest]: your owner, or from the people in charge, that we want the story this way, even if your conscience
[Guest]: your conscience or your own judgment is telling you otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but I was making, I was looking, I was making a slightly subtler point, like one,
[Amit Varma]: of course, there is your owner says, we'll only do these kind of stories, we won't talk about
[Amit Varma]: X company or Y politician. But the other is that you, you know, if you're in a place like that,
[Amit Varma]: one, even if you don't have direct orders, you know, what kind of stories run and what kind
[Amit Varma]: of stories don't, which could affect the way you do your work. And if you're one of these
[Amit Varma]: independent publications, which opposes this, right, and, and obviously more power to them,
[Amit Varma]: because they're opposing that, definitely, but because what they are doing can also sometimes
[Amit Varma]: feel as much as activism and journalism. So there's a danger there that you can have an
[Amit Varma]: agenda in the other side, that if you decide to, say, investigate a particular thing that
[Amit Varma]: those in power are doing, you can go in there with your mind already set up keys to expose
[Guest]: karenge. Yeah, since I worked, as I said, in a anti government, my first job, the danger there
[Guest]: is that you don't check all your facts, you're so willing to take everything against the people in
[Guest]: power, that you do not go through the rigor that you would in a normal newspaper, because you're
[Guest]: not concerned about a denial about the thing or they'll go on denying and all that. And I think
[Guest]: the real, real, real sad thing about journalism today and societies today is the polarization.
[Guest]: And I blame the government as much for creating such strong feelings against them.
[Guest]: There's no attempt at all, you know, to explain what are people supposed to do,
[Guest]: you can't blame the journalists also, because it's now reached a stage where
[Guest]: you cannot talk to the people who are in charge to give you the facts. I mean, you can make an
[Guest]: informed opinion only once you have both sides. But if you have to rely on whatever you get and
[Guest]: not get anything from their side, there's less and less interaction between the government and
[Guest]: the media. The government seems to be very dismissive of the media.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to talking about your journey through this period in the 70s, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 72 to 74, I think, Motherland and Indian Express onwards. What are the memorable stories you did?
[Amit Varma]: Like, were there moments where you did a story, and you felt, this is worth it,
[Amit Varma]: that I'm so happy I'm doing this? You know, what do you remember?
[Guest]: So many stories. I'm glad I did. So I do remember my first, what I considered scoop was within a
[Guest]: few months of my joining the paper. There was, I don't know if you're too young to remember what
[Guest]: was known as the Nagarwala case. And the story was that this gentleman, who I think we believe
[Guest]: worked for Raw or whatever, con man or whatever you're supposed to be, he's a Parsi,
[Guest]: my great advantage. He was supposed to have taken 60 lakhs from the State Bank of India
[Guest]: to India, imitating Mrs. Gandhi's voice. Now, which cashier gives 60 lakhs on the voice,
[Guest]: then the man comes and takes it, etc. But it was taken at face value by
[Guest]: everyone. It was just before the Bangladesh war, and I think they did have secret funds also.
[Guest]: There was a miscommunication in the government somewhere. And whatever it is, I was told,
[Guest]: go into the Parsi Anjuman and see if you can find out anything about this gentleman.
[Guest]: And I went to talk to the priest. And he says, well, I can tell you one thing that they're
[Guest]: saying he imitated Mrs. Gandhi's voice, but he can't do, I never heard him do a cat or a mouse
[Guest]: and his one side of his facial muscles, you know, paralyzed. So where is the question of this man
[Guest]: imitating Mrs. Gandhi's voice, which was the official, I mean, such a stupid defense they'd
[Guest]: given. So I remember that story gave me a lot of care, because all the opposition picked it up and
[Guest]: said, what is this nonsense about saying that the money has been taken out by, the cashier was
[Guest]: mistaken into thinking that. But over the years, I mean, there have been many rewarding stories.
[Guest]: One of the rewarding periods was at the end, towards the end of the emergency, when there
[Guest]: was still censorship when elections had been called, but nobody bothered then. And suddenly,
[Guest]: you had full reign to do whatever stories you want. That was the beauty of the Express.
[Guest]: And you could do stories about all the hardships that the people had faced for those 19 months,
[Guest]: you know, people in jail, people who had sterilizations, forcibly sterilized, all the
[Guest]: kinds of horror stories. And none of the other newspapers were doing them, only the Express.
[Guest]: Only the Express. I mean, Express, I remember going with my friend, she's passed away now,
[Guest]: Nandini Chandra from the Hindustan Times to a rally. And, you know, I was treated,
[Guest]: I've never been treated again like that. But like, if I said I was from the Express, I mean,
[Guest]: can I get your drink? Can I get your chair? Can I, when you're covering a rally, can I do this?
[Guest]: And to her, you know, she had to keep apologizing. You know, it's, we are not writing,
[Guest]: and it's, it's we are being told to say, how can you say this, this, this, this, this, this.
[Guest]: So that was also a very gratifying experience.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I do want to talk about the emergency a lot, because your wonderful book on that is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, has so much insight on that period. But before that, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first heard
[Amit Varma]: of me because of my blog, India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat
[Amit Varma]: popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many
[Amit Varma]: ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day, and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things. Well, that phase in my life ended for various
[Amit Varma]: reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now, I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have
[Amit Varma]: started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write regularly
[Amit Varma]: about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast,
[Amit Varma]: and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me more about tell me more about how you met. Tell me more about
[Guest]: As I said, there weren't that many people in motherland, especially in the reporters room. So
[Guest]: you know, we got friendly and I had joined Express before my marriage and he was still in the
[Guest]: motherland. And we continued to what you would call date. And I think my parents were aware of
[Guest]: it. They didn't approve, but we took a while before we actually
[Amit Varma]: And how was it for two journalists to be married to each other? Because, you know, you both got
[Amit Varma]: orders, you both and at least in my time, I remember journalists would absolutely work more, much more
[Amit Varma]: than they needed to in terms of how many hours they put in in the day. So how was sort of the
[Guest]: early dynamics of that? I remember the late Kewal Verma, who was a very well known economic journalist,
[Guest]: his wife told me, it's bad enough being married to one journalist, but for two
[Guest]: journalists to be married to each other is unforgivable. And my children do reproach me for
[Guest]: you know, they said you weren't at home. But I rationalized that because, you know, I was the
[Guest]: chief reporter and I used to live fairly close in those days, where I still live. It wasn't that far
[Guest]: from Indian Express, took 10 minutes to go. I didn't have a car, but I did use an auto rickshaw.
[Guest]: So I used to come home for lunch. And it's true that at night time, I wasn't there. And I am
[Guest]: really very grateful to the maid who stayed with me for so many years till my daughter got married.
[Guest]: Yeah, but it is in a way unfair on children. But I find in all professions, it's not only journalism.
[Guest]: My daughter's a lawyer, and she keeps her child out. But of course, she's a far more conscientious
[Amit Varma]: mother than I ever was. It's interesting that you should talk about, you know, being a far more
[Amit Varma]: conscientious mother. And I did an episode with Mrinal Pandey, who was a journalist around the
[Amit Varma]: same time as you as well. And even she speaks about how one of her daughters would always say
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, you were never there, and so on and so forth. So you know, what I find interesting about
[Amit Varma]: many younger people, and a good thing is that there is more intentionality about the things
[Amit Varma]: that they do, and the reasons why they are doing them. So if they, for example, get married, or if
[Amit Varma]: they become parents, it's, it's not that they've sort of drifted into that path of things, and
[Amit Varma]: things just happened. But sometimes, in some cases, they've thought about what it entails,
[Amit Varma]: and what it means, and all of that. So do you feel that in an earlier generation, like certainly,
[Amit Varma]: I see it is true of my generation, that people would often just drift along certain paths and
[Guest]: not give too much thought to stuff? Well, I'm a classic example who drifted along to certain
[Guest]: paths without thinking. And my mother was not a working thing. She only worked for charitable
[Guest]: clubs. But I think that what each generation use become more conscious of child rearing than the
[Guest]: one before, because we were left to the nannies basically to be brought up. It was just the way
[Guest]: things were done in those days. So I think I had a very close bond, actually, I hope I have with
[Guest]: both my daughters, we talk to each other every day and must have done something right. So give
[Amit Varma]: me a sense also of the political landscape of those days, number one, and your own awareness
[Amit Varma]: of it as journalists, in the sense that I imagine that in the 50s, and the first part of the 60s.
[Guest]: Yeah, I wasn't in, I mean, I wasn't working. I joined journalism in 70s. Mrs. Gandhi was the
[Amit Varma]: thing. Yeah, but I'm just thinking about how politics itself evolved before that,
[Amit Varma]: where in the 50s, and the first part of the 60s, you would have, you know, they would just have
[Amit Varma]: been the Congress and everyone would have been idealistic. And there would have been the sense
[Amit Varma]: of oh, this great nation is being built. But by the 70s, a lot of that has frayed.
[Amit Varma]: Politics itself became cynical. You know, you've in your book, you have reproduces great letter
[Amit Varma]: from Indira to Sanjay. Indira to Sanjay, that's one of my scoops, how I got it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and the letter is circa 67. And she's basically saying that, hey,
[Guest]: I don't believe in left or right. Yes, I thought that was so
[Guest]: amazing. It is much more than her letters to anyone else. She's been so frank with Sanjay,
[Guest]: whom she obviously was in constant, you know, they were on the same wavelength,
[Guest]: and she talked with them. And she, yeah, she had a very cynical view of politics,
[Guest]: how she runs down Lal Bahadur Shastri. And you know, the funny thing is, I made a big effort to
[Guest]: get those letters. I was so excited because you're talking about scoop. I got all of the letter.
[Guest]: And I won't tell you who gave them to me. But anyhow, I got them and there was no
[Guest]: camera, phones and all in those days. I was giving them, they were already falling apart
[Guest]: in those days. And I took notes, took as much notes as I could in those days. And I thought,
[Guest]: I promised the swaps that it'll be a great story. She says, no, it won't be carried.
[Guest]: I said, no, no, just leave it to me. Now, I was leaving the express. I was in the,
[Guest]: my notice period in the express. And I was going to India today. So I thought first,
[Guest]: the new one better. And I went even before I joined. And I suggested that I'll do the story.
[Guest]: Suman Dubey was the editor then. He hummed and hawed, but it was clear it wasn't going to be
[Guest]: carried. Then I tried with Mr. Varghese in the express. And I mean, it was history. If you read
[Guest]: those letters, it's just full of all kinds of observations of Indira Gandhi's personal thoughts.
[Guest]: And he also hummed and hawed and said, no, no, it's too personal. So the person who gave me the
[Guest]: letters was right. Nobody was going to carry it. Then my husband in those days was the editor of
[Guest]: the Free Press Journal in Bombay. So I gave a portion of it. I made a story and I gave it to
[Guest]: him and he carried it without a byline. It was Rajiv, there was the poster in those days.
[Guest]: Nations Hope, you know, and I still remember the headline because the letter showed that she was
[Guest]: in despair about Rajiv's future and what was he planning to do and what profession was he going
[Guest]: to do. Any mother would be worried. And the headline was Nations Hope was Mum's Despair.
[Guest]: And Guardian and others picked it up, but we didn't carry it. So, you know, even in those days,
[Guest]: there was a little bit of censorship. It's not as if there was total freedom.
[Guest]: I mean, we didn't go into private matters and things like that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And this particular letter that I'm referring to is dated 5th January 1967.
[Guest]: There was a whole bunch of them. And as I said, I was scribbling away furiously.
[Guest]: And what I actually did eventually was I kept my notes and a portion of it I used then. But
[Guest]: when I started my own service, agency service for newspapers, I used it as my first story.
[Guest]: And did any of the newspapers?
[Guest]: Everybody, all my newspapers carried it in big, in very little. So obviously,
[Guest]: times had changed by then.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. But I just want to read this line out because it's so illuminative where she wrote
[Amit Varma]: to Sanjay in January 1967, quote, the problem is not one of right or left,
[Amit Varma]: but a struggle for power, stop quote. And this is so illuminating in the context of
[Amit Varma]: what happened next, like these words were, of course, 1967 and the whole tilt leftward
[Amit Varma]: to sort of outflank the syndicate and this whole Garibi Hatao nonsense where while that was
[Amit Varma]: clearly from her policies, the last thing she wanted, you know, is so clearly because of
[Amit Varma]: political calculation, not a sincere belief in a particular worldview, nor a desire that better
[Amit Varma]: things should happen to people, but simply a question of how do I position myself? How do I,
[Amit Varma]: you know, outflank my opponents within the party? And perhaps later on, how do I get votes by making
[Amit Varma]: the right noises? The letters were given to you or you had to copy down whatever was in them?
[Guest]: They were not presented to me. I had to copy down and they were taken away afterwards.
[Amit Varma]: It's incredible. Yeah. So tell us me and my listeners a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: sort of the mahal of the political mahal of those days, as it were, and I'm talking pre-emergency.
[Guest]: Because that's what the mahal, as I said, that is when I entered journalism,
[Guest]: was that she basically called the shots. And actually, at heart, she was really a right
[Guest]: wing person, as you could see from the emergency, the way she supported us.
[Amit Varma]: But socially right wing. Economically extremely left.
[Guest]: Left because it was what she had inherited and what she thought she should push. Her battle with
[Guest]: Morarji Desa and the syndicate was not really about, as she said, it was a struggle for power,
[Guest]: not about left or right. And of course, she was Nehru's daughter who genuinely believed in all
[Guest]: the socialism mantra. Her son was totally opposite, Sanjay. I don't know how he came up with that
[Amit Varma]: family, but he was definitely right wing. You know, I would say that he was economically,
[Amit Varma]: he was also statist. He wanted to use the state to do his things. No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
[Guest]: But during Maruti, he used the state in so many, like classic cronyism.
[Guest]: But that is a difference for personal gain. But if you read anything about the emergency,
[Guest]: you will see his knives are out for all Mrs. Gandhi's leftist advisors, starting with Huxer.
[Guest]: He thought they were all a bunch of hypocrites. And he went around with this gang of tough goons
[Guest]: who had no right or left beliefs, but just, you know, staying in power, Bansilal, VC Shukla.
[Guest]: But I think at heart, very much he was against the leftist policies. He has also said it. So
[Guest]: he was he at towards the end of the emergency, when Mrs. Gandhi had to then sort of make amends,
[Guest]: he gave an interview to Uma Vasudev, where he's hit out at the CPI allies,
[Guest]: and it created such a furor. And then Uma Vasudev was forced to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I looking back at the interview, I mean, I agree with everything you've said,
[Amit Varma]: and I think he was an absolute monster. But it's just I think, while he was against leftists per
[Amit Varma]: se, he wasn't for free markets at any point. I didn't see that expression so deeply about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So it was a it was a reflexive antipathy towards an unpleasant bunch of people who
[Guest]: happened to be leftists. No, but the fact that he wanted to start an enterprise of his own,
[Guest]: it helped him. He wanted it to be his own profit making.
[Amit Varma]: But the methods, but the methods were crony capitalist and therefore classically status.
[Guest]: That's because he had the advantage of having the mother who was the Prime Minister,
[Guest]: so that he could use the instruments of the state to further his own capitalist.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. Which in my mind, which in my mind is more left wing than right wing.
[Amit Varma]: Because it's left wing means using the power of the state. That's what it comes and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, restraining economic freedom. I'm sure if later on in time,
[Amit Varma]: he had an established corporation, he would have crushed any competition, which is again,
[Amit Varma]: that's not economically right wing at all. But, you know, we'll come to Sanjay and his cronies.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, you know, you've got another lovely letter from Siddharth Shankar Ray to Indira
[Amit Varma]: before the emergency a few months before the emergency, where he's advising her
[Amit Varma]: on what she should do, which which kind of tells you that everything was planned.
[Guest]: Like if I may quote from the letter. You know, in both my books, I have been very
[Guest]: fortunate, because in both I have managed to get I hit to do a book, which is just a rehash of
[Guest]: putting together and researching what other people have written. I think I managed to break new
[Guest]: ground in both of them. In the case of the Parsis about the whole Tata's which is clothed in so much
[Guest]: secrecy and, you know, there's so much that nobody wants to cast a stone. Whereas in the case of this,
[Guest]: there was actually the motherland had brought out this story, but nobody believed the motherland
[Guest]: story that she had planned actually to impose the emergency much earlier when Ellen Mishra was
[Amit Varma]: killed. Yeah, yeah. That comes out very clearly. I'll tell you who gave me the letter if you want
[Amit Varma]: says he's dead. R.K. Dhawan. R.K. Dhawan gave you the letter. Wow. So, yeah, it's an interesting
[Amit Varma]: letter, which Okay, I won't read it out. But it gives in great detail all the things she has to
[Guest]: do. Exactly. And that all these suave, you know, educated liberals from the in the West from all
[Guest]: the big university. I mean, when it came down, they gave Mrs. Gandhi the reason for carrying out
[Guest]: her emergency. I mean, they clothed it in so called constitutional language, but it.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about so we'll take a brief digression here before we come to the emergency itself,
[Amit Varma]: which is you've pointed out that so many people, you know, gave you so many letters and confided
[Amit Varma]: in you and trusted you. And one of the themes that has, you know, one of the questions that pops up
[Amit Varma]: when I look at your remarkably long running column, many decades, where you are literally
[Amit Varma]: as the name indicates, giving the inside scoop on so many different things. How do you and I
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't even say cultivate sources because that seems like a cynical term where you use people in
[Amit Varma]: an instrumental way. But you have clearly built up the trust within so many people where they're
[Amit Varma]: willing to trust you and talk to you and occasionally give you documents as well and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. How does that work? Like, is it something that you strategize that you say that this is
[Amit Varma]: how I will behave with them? This is how I will treat them? Or does it just come naturally to
[Amit Varma]: you that you're friendly and straightforward? So people just trust you? I think people do trust me
[Amit Varma]: and I've never betrayed a trust ever. But it's luck. It's not luck. I mean, if you've kept it
[Amit Varma]: going for so many decades, because it's something that I would find extremely hard. I mean, today,
[Amit Varma]: of course, I'm very fortunate that people who come on my show kind of. Well, I've reduced it
[Guest]: to a fortnight because I found in this government is very difficult to get information and I wonder
[Guest]: how long it can continue. But, you know, I've done my at my age, I should have retired long back.
[Guest]: But you know how I started this column? It didn't start with the Express.
[Guest]: This what they call it gossip. But I want to tell you that if you get any fact wrong,
[Guest]: which is why I suffer from anxiety problem, you'll get a strong letter contradiction thing
[Guest]: and that's what I've so far managed to avoid any court case of any sort. But the point is,
[Guest]: this is an art of writing something. But that I think I did have a flair for and how I first
[Guest]: started out in this line is the Udian Sharma, who's now dead. He used to be with the Sunday.
[Guest]: He started a gossip column. We never had them in mainline newspapers. It was called D.E. Nizamuddin.
[Guest]: That was his address. Udian went off to Calcutta, I think. So he asked my husband to continue the
[Guest]: column. My husband went off to become editor of the Free Press Journal. So I was in Delhi. They
[Guest]: said, you do it. So I started doing it at that time for some time. And I thought that I have
[Guest]: a natural aptitude. At least I thought I had an aptitude for it. And those days salaries were so
[Guest]: poor that you quietly moonlighted as well. So I said I did that. Then after I left India today,
[Guest]: I decided to go on my own, which is why I started offering people a syndicate in which I offered
[Guest]: them two or three stories a month. I forgotten how many stories for a month. And I was going
[Guest]: with Vinod home in Bombay. He was giving me a lift, Vinod Mehta. And he said, you know,
[Guest]: the thing people really want to read is gossip, news gossip. Because he and the observer was
[Guest]: carrying something. So I thought about it and I said I'm offering both the newspapers to these
[Guest]: newspapers. They were in different languages and this column. And it was an instant hit.
[Guest]: And after that, in some form or the other, long before I started the Express One,
[Guest]: it was going because even when I stopped the syndicate and I joined the Sunday Mail,
[Guest]: I was writing it for them there. And I saw that generally it was appreciated. I never
[Guest]: thought a mainstream paper like Indian Express would carry it. It's to the greatness of Nandini
[Guest]: Mehta, who was the Sunday editor, that she said, yeah, I'd like to carry it. I thought they'll
[Guest]: never carry it. It's too lowbrow for them. But it started. The first one in the Indian Express
[Guest]: was, but the column was much before Indian Express, but the first one in Indian Express was
[Guest]: on the day, week that Rajiv Gandhi died. And I'd given all the details of what went behind the
[Guest]: scene of how this pressure for Sonia to take over and how Amitabh Bachchan had scuttled it, etc.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. And 30 years. And you know, the thing is, I feel the word gossip doesn't do justice to it.
[Guest]: That's what I always say, because Vinod and I had an argument once. We were rivals. I was
[Guest]: editing the Sunday Mail. He was editing the Sunday Observer. And he wrote something about
[Guest]: the Sunday Mail in his gossip. Not he, one of his staffers. So I said, Vinod, it's OK, but
[Guest]: you've got this, this, this fact, it's wrong there. So he said, you know, gossip. And then
[Guest]: he wrote it actually. It's 60 percent correct. But he was totally wrong. You get one fact wrong.
[Guest]: You don't even get a fact wrong. Still, a person will write a letter saying something else.
[Guest]: I remember. So obviously, these little snippets sting people quite badly.
[Guest]: On one occasion, I had written something about Rahul Gandhi having to pay admission
[Guest]: because they thought he was not an Indian. This is before he joined politics. It was correct.
[Guest]: As far as I know, it was correct. But his sister, who never writes a letter, wrote a long letter to
[Guest]: talk about things that I'd never said and about what my brother-in-law said,
[Guest]: which has nothing to do with me. So you can't get away with writing gossip. It has to be,
[Guest]: you know, authenticated. And these days, frankly, I'm getting my newspapers breathing heavily down
[Guest]: my neck to show that each fact, because people are willing to deny anything that if they get
[Amit Varma]: half a chance. Why I like your column is that I think it, it gives an inside view, which is
[Amit Varma]: authentic and which, you know, gives us all so much better understanding into people and the
[Amit Varma]: things that happen and so on and so forth. So I feel that gossip is a little unfair,
[Amit Varma]: because the implication of gossip is that this is frivolous. This is hearsay.
[Guest]: In a newspaper, anything that's written in a newspaper is whether you can't say it's hearsay,
[Guest]: you know, you'll have to stand by what you've written.
[Amit Varma]: So quick question. In your book, you mentioned this foreign journalist who once wrote what
[Amit Varma]: appears to be a classic piece of gossip that he said he overheard saying something that Sanjay
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi slapped his mother six times. And, and straight away, the journalist was like
[Amit Varma]: backed out of the country. Was there something to that?
[Guest]: See, it was a gossip going around at that time, in the emergency, and people love that type of
[Guest]: thing. But where he could have got such information is hard to believe. After my book came out,
[Guest]: somebody asked him the question. The gentleman was alive. And he says, Yes,
[Guest]: it's true. But he never revealed his sources or where exactly it came out from.
[Guest]: I mean, it sounds very hard to believe.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I mean, scoundrel as he was, and she might well have been in under his sway.
[Guest]: That's what I mean by, you know, people become so anti a particular site that they feel they
[Amit Varma]: are entitled to write anything. Yeah, exactly. Let's get back to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the emergency and your book is so vivid in terms of all the details. And I think those
[Amit Varma]: are important. Because, you know, the current times are, of course, pretty bad. But you know,
[Amit Varma]: I've been a dissenter, I've gotten into trouble. But at the same time, I feel it is facile when
[Amit Varma]: people say this is like another emergency, or they downplay the actual emergency and say,
[Amit Varma]: No, that wasn't that bad. And I'm like, you know, a friend of mine who's a journalist, oddly enough,
[Amit Varma]: said something like this to me the other day. And I said, Boss, have you read about the emergency?
[Amit Varma]: Have you read about what happened? In fact, I recommended your book to him right then,
[Amit Varma]: because I just feel that so much of what happened in the emergency, we've just completely forgotten
[Amit Varma]: it, it's just become a word, you know, the fact that the entire political opposition was in jail,
[Amit Varma]: what happened to the media, at one point, you've pointed out that during the emergency, Indira
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi arrested more people than the British Empire did during the Quit India movement,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and all of these kind of give a perspective on how horrendous it was. So,
[Amit Varma]: as individuals who actually lived through this period reported on this period, your husband
[Amit Varma]: actually went to jail during this period, tell me a little bit about how it unfolded for you
[Guest]: when it began. It was nightmare, there's no other word to describe it, but nightmare,
[Guest]: a nightmare, which kept getting worse and worse and worse, when you think things couldn't get
[Guest]: worse, it did. So, because, you know, my husband, I thought when he comes out of jail,
[Guest]: it will be better. But actually, things became worse when he was out of jail than when he was
[Guest]: in jail, because we were followed everywhere. I mean, he couldn't go anywhere. I mean, as
[Guest]: journalists, if I went to meet somebody, very often the fellow who was, you know, following me,
[Guest]: following me not because of my husband alone, because of my brother-in-law, who was wanted by
[Guest]: the government. My father, who was suffering from cancer, his house was raided many times. And I
[Guest]: mean, it was just one long nightmare. But I mean, that doesn't justify, I don't want to do What
[Guest]: About Tree, and I don't feel we should do What About Tree of today's suppression of both the
[Guest]: media and freedom of expression. Because that was at least one point about it was all on paper,
[Guest]: very officially, that you have censorship, that you have no laws. Here, ostensibly, we do. But
[Guest]: you can certainly see a lot of pressure that you don't write against the powers that be.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in the sense that...
[Guest]: Which is very frightening. And the biggest horror for me of the emergency was that I never knew,
[Guest]: I never believed she'd lift it. Because a friend asked me that, well, your husband's going to be
[Guest]: out someday. I said, what someday? You know, you read all these books about Soviet Russia and all
[Guest]: that. And you think it's for a lifetime. So it was a bad period. But it's sad that
[Guest]: knowing that bad period, the present people in power do not realize that they're going in the
[Amit Varma]: same direction. I have a question for you. In your book, many of the characters are people who
[Amit Varma]: actually came to power in 2014. You know, in the sense, Arun Jaitley went to jail during that time,
[Guest]: you know, he's part of...
[Guest]: They came more to power when Vajpayee became Prime Minister.
[Amit Varma]: That too. But in terms of like Narendra Modi, for example, is one of the minor characters.
[Guest]: Yeah, I didn't meet him.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but he's one of the minor characters in your book. And he, you know, when your brother-in-law
[Amit Varma]: would go to Gujarat, he would take him to Makarandesai's house and meet him often and all
[Amit Varma]: that. And I would have imagined that all of these people, Mr. Jaitley, Mr. Modi, a lot of the people
[Amit Varma]: who are, you know, involved in this government in some way or the other, that the lesson that they
[Amit Varma]: would have learned from the emergency is that the Indian state can be this oppressive beast, and we
[Amit Varma]: must never let this happen. But instead, the lesson that they seem to have learned is wait for it to
[Amit Varma]: be our turn, hum dikha denge. At least from Mr. Modi, that's an attitude that...
[Guest]: Well, you mentioned Mr. Jaitley's name. I don't think he was a close friend, and I don't think
[Guest]: he ever had any such view. And you will notice that things have become much harsher in the second
[Guest]: avatar of this government than the first one. Mr. Jaitley went out of his way always to extend
[Guest]: a hand to the media and even people he disliked, he was free with information. Today's reached a
[Guest]: stage where nobody wants to talk to us, you know. We're not allowed in any of the places, unless
[Guest]: you're one of the favoured few. I mean, the press has just looked as a hostile opponent.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, just as a tangent, one hears of another great tradition that sort of ended with him in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that not only was he good to the press, he would always reach out to the opposition,
[Amit Varma]: talk to people in the opposition. Always reach out, that was an earlier tradition.
[Amit Varma]: And that has ended. That has ended. Very sad.
[Amit Varma]: And that was a bipartisan tradition that, you know, when Chidambaram was FM, he would talk
[Amit Varma]: to Jaitley. When Jaitley was FM, he would talk to the other side. In fact, as Pooja Mehra, you know,
[Amit Varma]: writes in her book and speaks about in an episode with me, there was that continuity
[Amit Varma]: in the finance ministry between the Chidambaram ministry and the Jaitley ministry. And everything
[Guest]: kind of went to hell. It doesn't mean that you have to
[Guest]: change everything that has happened in a previous government, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. But with regard to those people who were there then who didn't learn that lesson,
[Amit Varma]: like our Prime Minister today, why do you think that happened, that you lived through those times?
[Guest]: He was very young, actually, then. I think they have not been brought up in the right traditions.
[Guest]: You must also remember that the first avatar of the BJP, which was under Vajpayee,
[Guest]: they were very conscious, had a far more liberal bent and a background. Whereas these people have
[Guest]: come from a rather parochial state governments where there was always rather suppressive and
[Guest]: authoritarian and have now tried to impose the same model at the centre. This is my feeling.
[Guest]: This is my feeling. They did not have such a wide worldview picture of what things are.
[Guest]: Mind you, at the same time, I will give them all credit, which their opponents are not,
[Guest]: which is why I talk about this unfortunate polarisation. The fact is, we must give this
[Guest]: government all credit for the extent to which they have been able to deliver the services
[Guest]: from the government to the people, which we have seen in earlier governments was totally
[Guest]: went into the wrong hands, partly because of computerisation, Aadhaar, whatever it is,
[Guest]: they must be given full credit for that. And that so many journalists failed to see
[Guest]: this when they went on tours, you know, in the 2014 election. You could see that people
[Guest]: might were saying that, look, I've got this gas, I've got toilet.
[Amit Varma]: 2019 you mean?
[Amit Varma]: 2014.
[Guest]: Oh, okay.
[Guest]: No, no, that's right. 2019.
[Amit Varma]: Because that's when they delivered.
[Guest]: When they delivered. That's right. 2019 when they delivered. Yeah, 2014 was more against
[Guest]: the thing.
[Guest]: That was an anti-vote.
[Guest]: It was an anti-vote of corruption. But 2019 was, it was very clear.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, though I noticed a lot of the journalism on this was after the fact,
[Amit Varma]: where people realised, hey, we got it wrong. And then you started hearing narratives about
[Guest]: Yeah, that's my point. But if you had an objective frame of mind, neither one way or the other,
[Guest]: you would have seen it then. Yeah, but they always rationalise.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And now they'll talk about it as if, hey, we said it all along, delivery of welfare was
[Guest]: better.
[Guest]: I also made a mistake, which I broke my cardinal rule at one point. I went to Western Europe
[Guest]: and I went with two other journalists. And then one of them took me to see all the local
[Guest]: journalists. And they said, no, this, you see this leader, this and this one, that and this
[Guest]: caste here and that and the Muslim solidarity. They give a quoting figure. So I played it safe
[Guest]: and said almost neck and neck. But in my heart of hearts, I knew then. That's why when the
[Guest]: second time I went during the same election period, I went, I said, I'm going by myself.
[Guest]: And I went to Haryana. And the writing was so clear on the wall. I said, I've never been to
[Guest]: an election where I can say, I said, nine out of ten, only possibly Huda can retain his seat.
[Guest]: And my newspaper wasn't willing to put it on the front page. I was giving a clear election,
[Guest]: you know, trend. But it was so clear. You don't stick your neck out. I mean,
[Guest]: you always play neck and neck, you know, so and so the head and all that.
[Guest]: But even when you do, people are scared that you could go wrong. But bias is shown
[Amit Varma]: very often in covering elections. So one of the sort of things that you detail in your book
[Amit Varma]: is about how there were so many arrests and how they unfolded. Like first of all,
[Amit Varma]: when they were planned, you speak about how the Delhi DM and the police and all of that were told
[Amit Varma]: arrest them under MISA maintenance of Internal Security Act. In fact, Lalu Prasad named one of
[Amit Varma]: his daughters after that in protest, arrest them under MISA because then they can't go to the
[Amit Varma]: courts. So that's part one of the planning, the entire opposition is sort of arrested,
[Amit Varma]: or ordinary people are arrested, to the point that at one point, the entire Sanskrit Department
[Amit Varma]: of Delhi University is in jail. Students everywhere are, you know, doing peaceful
[Amit Varma]: civil disobedience and being taken to jail. And what you also have here is that in the Soviet
[Amit Varma]: Union, it was very famous how there is this widespread distrust to society because you
[Amit Varma]: cannot trust your neighbor. And even here, you point out that some people are taking sides,
[Amit Varma]: who do you trust? Like there's a story about how Arun Jaitley at one point was supposed to be
[Amit Varma]: picked up by Prabhu Chawla on a scooter behind a building and then Prabhu Chawla will make an
[Unknown]: escape with him. But Prabhu Chawla didn't turn up. And then he later he finds out that Prabhu Chawla
[Amit Varma]: signed Mrs. Gandhi's 20 point program and he's gone to the other side.
[Amit Varma]: So what was the social environment? Very bad, very bad. And
[Guest]: you didn't want to embarrass other people. But you saw straight away how very decent ordinary people,
[Guest]: you know, they didn't want to get involved. They wanted to save their own skins.
[Guest]: In fact, I mentioned in the book that even when I just said on the phone to a family friend
[Guest]: that, have you heard that she's, you know, imposed an emergency? She said, what? What?
[Guest]: And she put down the phone because she obviously went to consult with her husband.
[Guest]: But she never gave him to even collect what she had left. She sent the driver and never saw her
[Guest]: again. And there were many people I never saw there. And I also didn't want to get them involved
[Guest]: because in my case, it was particularly messy, as I said, with my brother-in-law,
[Guest]: because my brother-in-law wanted very badly. Tell me a little bit about how it was when
[Amit Varma]: your husband himself was arrested. And it was in this very bizarre incident where he wasn't
[Amit Varma]: actually arrested for what he did. He was at this event. And Ambika Soni, who was one of Sanjay
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi's cronies was, you know, getting a boy roughed up by the police. And he said, you know,
[Amit Varma]: leave the boy alone. And she said, who the fuck are you come to jail, that kind of thing. So,
[Amit Varma]: so what was that period like when that happened? You mentioned that you were scared that he may
[Guest]: never come out because, you know, so we didn't know about. But when he finally came out,
[Guest]: it was in a way worse than when he was in, because he was also traumatized by his jail
[Guest]: experience. And I mean, you were an untouchable because that was the time when Swami resurfaced,
[Guest]: you know, made an appearance in jail and then disappeared. So the police was not only following
[Guest]: my sister. She's a very courageous woman. I'm not so. Everywhere, I mean, my family's house was
[Guest]: raided. My house was searched several times. It was just a terrible period. And I mean, an ordinary
[Guest]: person like me, what am I going to know? You know, I travel in a bus and behind the bus would be
[Guest]: these motor scooters and a car. I mean, can you think of how one of the people in Vichal Bhai
[Guest]: Patel house where I was staying in MP's quarters said, you know, I've never seen such security
[Guest]: except for Farooq Abdullah. Yeah, I mean, if they were going to follow you. And I was a very minor
[Guest]: player. I was not the main one. I can understand my sister or somebody else. No, I'm just thinking
[Amit Varma]: that if you were going to go by bus and they're going to follow you by car, you could just have
[Amit Varma]: taken a lift with them. I'm also struck by one of the anecdotes where you talk about how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when Virender Ji was in jail, you know, Charan Singh took him to a room and he told your husband,
[Amit Varma]: how did people like so many, not just politicians, but journalists, people in society spend so much
[Amit Varma]: time in jail. How do you deal with it? Like, what are the different stages? Like one, of course,
[Guest]: this is an angry thing that Mr. Charan Singh is saying. No, he was determined. Half the reason,
[Guest]: I mean, one of the reasons why the Janata Party fell, government fell, was that Charan Singh
[Guest]: had a one point program to put Mrs. Gandhi in jail. You can put her in jail for many things,
[Guest]: but it takes time. You know, the Shah commission was going on. But his was really stupid things.
[Guest]: He got the CBI, he got them to say that there was some money or something under house. I mean,
[Guest]: the Janata government looked ridiculous and she came out the heroine.
[Amit Varma]: And another sort of interesting story is that when your husband with a handful of other people
[Amit Varma]: was being shifted from Tihar to Bareilly, you know, while he's on that van, he realizes that
[Amit Varma]: he's being shifted and he wants to get a message to you. So I love reading about the way he sent
[Guest]: you that message. Tell us a little bit about, you know. Yeah, he sent it through somebody who was on
[Guest]: a scooter behind him and that man phoned me up. So he dropped something on the street? No,
[Guest]: he didn't drop it on the street. It was the scooter. He was in the van, which has barbed
[Guest]: wire. You can put your hand out. And the scooter was coming behind on the roads. So he indicated
[Guest]: to that man to take it. It was very good of that man. He phoned me up. And that thing had your
[Guest]: phone number and a message. It had my phone number and message saying I'm being transferred to
[Guest]: Bareilly. And so I rushed to the railway station in Bareilly. But after I got the message from him,
[Guest]: Mrs. Malkani also phoned me. The ISS was quite organized. And they said your husband is
[Guest]: being transferred to Bareilly if you go to the tip. But my first message I got was from this.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. It's like so cinematic. Like in today's world, you know, everything is smartphone,
[Amit Varma]: WhatsApp, you think that's how messages go. But to think of the privations of those times,
[Amit Varma]: and later you point out how he managed to smuggle across a letter from Bareilly to you,
[Amit Varma]: in which he had written, quote, do something to get me out of here. I'm going mad in this place.
[Guest]: Tihar was heaven compared to this, top quote. Yeah, because what happened was in Bareilly,
[Guest]: that's why I said it was a worst time because what happened was in Tihar, I've described the jail.
[Guest]: But when these four prisoners, very strangely selected, he had nothing in common with the other
[Guest]: three, came to Bareilly, they had all heard about the jailbreak, which was why the prisoners were
[Guest]: big. So they thought these were the escapees. And they put them for one month in solitary
[Guest]: confinement. And one month in solitary confinement will do anything to a person's mind because
[Guest]: every six hours, they just tap, even when you're sleeping, you know, on the thing to see that you
[Guest]: haven't hung yourself. You're not allowed to talk to anyone or have any connection.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I referred to, I was struck by, you know, Charan Singh's anger and what he said
[Amit Varma]: is that I think, you know, when if I try to imagine myself in that situation,
[Amit Varma]: being in jail for a while, being in solitary for a month or whatever, I think I would be filled
[Amit Varma]: with rage, right? Or I would just, just give up and just, you know, become completely apathetic.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not what is happening. All of these people who are in jail from politicians to
[Amit Varma]: journalists and all of that, they are coming back after the emergency and, you know, in what,
[Amit Varma]: what are the different ways in which they change? And what are the ways in which people like you
[Amit Varma]: dealt with the anger you suffered a lot through this period as well?
[Guest]: Yeah, but I find politicians are particularly resilient, actually, more than the rest of us.
[Amit Varma]: But how did you cope? How did you?
[Guest]: There was no option in the matter. One had to cope where the best one could,
[Amit Varma]: you know, live from day to day.
[Amit Varma]: And when it came to the friends who'd stopped talking to you during this period,
[Amit Varma]: because they wanted to be safe and all that, did you at some point find it in your heart
[Guest]: to forgive them? Or were you like, no, we have seen?
[Guest]: I didn't have any permanent. I understood your point,
[Guest]: you know, because you don't want to talk to somebody. In fact,
[Guest]: I remember somebody seeing me from UNI, a journalist, and he said, Hi, how are you?
[Guest]: I said, just go to the other side of the road. There are people behind me. And he fled. But,
[Guest]: you know, because he would have had people going after him as well. So what is this?
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: One of the unique things about the emergency is, you know, that extra constitutional authority
[Amit Varma]: in Sanjay Gandhi, so to say, Sanjay Gandhi running amok, his coterie running completely
[Amit Varma]: amok and all of that. And you've sort of written a lot about him in his book,
[Amit Varma]: which I won't get into. And a lot of it is kind of well known. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: before I ask you about the coterie, I'm just struck by something that every time his birthday
[Amit Varma]: comes around every year, you know, the Congress will put out all these tweets and all of that
[Amit Varma]: saying the great visionary leader, Sanjay Gandhi, this and that, even when, you know, Gulab Nabi
[Amit Varma]: Azad quit recently from the Congress, he said, Oh, Sanjay had got me into the party and this and that.
[Amit Varma]: And is it like we haven't come to terms with our history of what a monster he was, how he was just
[Guest]: an order of magnitude. I will tell you one thing that most of these people of that generation,
[Guest]: Kamal Nath, Gulab Nabi, the whole lot of them who came into the party at the time were
[Guest]: brought in by Sanjay. Rajiv never moved in. Rajiv only took what he inherited apart from Arun
[Guest]: Nehru and Arun Singh. I don't think there were many people whom he personally recruited from
[Guest]: into the party. Sanjay brought a whole Ambika Soni, all these were brought, Sanjay's recruits.
[Amit Varma]: Well, firstly, most of them are dubious people. I don't know, there were dubious, you know,
[Guest]: times and things. Everyone wants to be in power. But secondly, if you're in politics.
[Amit Varma]: No, fair enough. But many of them like Jagmohan, like Ambika Soni behave pretty
[Amit Varma]: badly then as, you know, your book details. But the other aspect of it is that you would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that you don't want to do you want to wipe this out from your history. You don't want to talk
[Amit Varma]: about this guy. That's what I would imagine. After the kind of things he's done, you'd be
[Amit Varma]: embarrassed to talk about an association with him. And yet it seems we have learned nothing
[Amit Varma]: from history. We are still celebrating him. We are still calling him. Actually,
[Guest]: the Congress doesn't celebrate him that much. Every birthday on Twitter, they go nuts.
[Guest]: I don't know about the Twitter, but generally it is, you'll notice it is Rahul Rajiv's birthday,
[Amit Varma]: Indira Gandhi's. No, no, those are understandable. But there was there was one,
[Amit Varma]: I think a couple of years back on his birthday, I took a lot of screenshots also,
[Amit Varma]: because I couldn't believe it. I was like, what are you doing? And it's not just one Congress
[Amit Varma]: handle, every Congress handle, regional handle, state handle. I would hope so. But let's let's
[Amit Varma]: talk a little bit about like, one, of course, there is his youth where he was incredibly
[Amit Varma]: sort of anti-social, stealing hubcaps from cars, stealing cars and going on joyrides and all that
[Amit Varma]: nonsense was happening. And, of course, using government machinery in the way he did, where he
[Amit Varma]: would force people to, you know, sort of invest in Maruti, as it were. And this is not the Maruti
[Amit Varma]: Maruti. This is his company called Maruti before, you know, that went to hell. Tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about his coterie, this bunch of people who were attracted to power. And, you know,
[Guest]: he chose men of action rather than men. Of values.
[Guest]: No, not values. Well, who thought they were thinkers. Bansilal was a no nonsense,
[Guest]: you know, believed rough and ready methods. Ambika was a hanger on. But his basic people,
[Guest]: Dhawan was another one. They all just followed orders.
[Amit Varma]: There's a great quote about Bansilal over here, in fact, where I'll read out this passage about
[Amit Varma]: Bansilal from your book. Quote Bansilal terrorized his officers and ran the state. And this is
[Amit Varma]: Haryana. Bansilal terrorized his officers and ran the state with despotic ruthlessness.
[Amit Varma]: When an old and respected lawyer of Panipat denounced Lal's corrupt rule, he was arrested
[Amit Varma]: and stripped naked. His face was tarred and he was dragged all through the streets of the town.
[Amit Varma]: When a Bhivani newspaper, Chetna, dared to criticize Lal's barbaric ways, it had to pay
[Amit Varma]: a heavy price. A senior officer of the municipality arrived with a gang of 30 workmen armed with
[Amit Varma]: spades and crowbars. They started knocking down the front portion of the building.
[Amit Varma]: Later, during the emergency, Chetna's editor, Devrata Vashisht and his father were arrested
[Amit Varma]: on 13 trumped up charges. Vashisht's wife continued fearlessly to bring out the newspaper.
[Amit Varma]: Her 17 year old son was beaten to a pulp with rods, chains, lathis and belts. The police refused
[Amit Varma]: to record the FIR and the local doctors were too frightened to even provide first aid. Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you later quote Bansilal saying to BK Nehru at one point where BK Nehru is saying, should we
[Amit Varma]: have a presidential system? And Bansilal says to him, Nehru sahib, get rid of all this election
[Amit Varma]: nonsense. If you ask me, just make our sister president for life and there's no need to do
[Amit Varma]: anything else. Stop quote. And Bansilal also was one of the ruthless enforcers of Sanjay Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: crazy coercive family planning this thing. And people like this kind of survived in politics
[Guest]: and many of them thrived in politics even. Bansilal won election after election.
[Guest]: His family still continues to, you know, get votes on his name. So people also like doers.
[Guest]: It's not it's not that everyone believes in democracy. I think a lot of people feel,
[Guest]: unfortunately, that if you're making progress and he was a doer as chief minister, he did help to
[Guest]: change Haryana, begin the change. So, I mean, I think a lot of Indian people are not so bothered
[Guest]: about democracy or authoritarianism and issues like that. They're more concerned about bread
[Guest]: and butter issues. And is that something you lament? Of course. I mean, the fact is that
[Guest]: all of them were reelected. All of them came back. So within a few years, it was forgotten.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. I mean, but winning an election, you may win elections, but that doesn't mean that.
[Guest]: I'm not saying it's right. Exactly. I'm saying that what are the priorities for the people?
[Amit Varma]: I'm lamenting along with you. Yeah. So during this time, since the media was suppressed,
[Amit Varma]: you know, LK Advani famously said that, you know, the press was asked to bend, they chose to crawl.
[Amit Varma]: During this time, like your book has so many details of atrocities, all the things Bansilal
[Amit Varma]: did, all the things VC Shukla did, all the, you know, the Turkmengate massacres, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all the things that were done with bulldozers. Then we talk about bulldozers in
[Amit Varma]: 2022. We forget the bulldozers of 1975, right? All the things and not and both are equally monstrous.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Were people at that time aware that all this is going on? And as journalists,
[Amit Varma]: what were the pressures upon you in terms of reporting what was around you?
[Guest]: Well, when it was happening at its height, you could write anything because the newspapers all
[Guest]: went to the censor and all they would have done would have been to hold your paper so that didn't
[Guest]: come out at all. So this idea that the newspapers could do anything for most of the time was
[Guest]: incorrect. I mean, you could hint like I remember when I was covering the Turkmengate, you know,
[Guest]: the relocation of people to these, what is that area, Jamna areas. We could only write that they
[Guest]: were going in pouring rain, which they were and their houses, you know, it just had to be a slight
[Guest]: hint here and there. The girl who came first in her exam, CBSE board, you know, you said her father
[Guest]: is in jail, but you couldn't explain. So if the reader got the hint, it had to pass the censor.
[Guest]: The real independence was after elections were announced. Though there was supposed to be
[Guest]: censorship, it was not carried out. So all of this stuff was happening. You
[Guest]: guys were seeing it as journalists. And Delhi knew about it. Delhi,
[Guest]: everyone talks. So the common people in Delhi know. But a lot of the stories I did in that
[Guest]: small period, when I went to Bombay, they all said, but we didn't know that this was all happening.
[Guest]: So I think Delhi was an extreme, it happened in an extreme, and everyone knew about it.
[Guest]: The sterilization drive, everybody was affected. It's not one or two people.
[Amit Varma]: And it's quite clear when we sort of read about that period. And even from, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've quoted Bansilal in your book as saying, why have elections? Didi ko bana do.
[Amit Varma]: We look back on history with hindsight and think that everything that happened was inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: But at that time, you said there was a fear this will never end.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so when you think of it, do you think we got really lucky that Indira seems to have
[Amit Varma]: cared about what the liberal press in the West will think of her? And she seemed to have this
[Amit Varma]: hubris that election karenge toh, of course, she will win anyway. So do you think we are really
[Guest]: lucky that she was delusional in that way? It's only that she thought, I don't think
[Guest]: she'd have called it if she thought she'd lose. Sanjay, I know now, I found out was dead opposed
[Guest]: to it. He said, give a few more years. How could you call it? She didn't consult him before.
[Guest]: Maybe the pressure was getting too much for her. I mean, she was Nehru's daughter and all
[Guest]: her liberal friends abroad were ostracizing her. She didn't want that situation. And she thought
[Guest]: she had broken the opposition. And it would be difficult for them to get together because
[Guest]: they're very limited time. I didn't believe it myself, you know, when it happened, when
[Guest]: I used to say that I just don't want her to get a two thirds majority so that she can change
[Guest]: the constitution and amend it. Never occurred to me, though I did. I was sent to
[Guest]: suss out the poll seen in Delhi. I said in Delhi, they're winning seven out of seven Lok Sabha
[Guest]: seats. But I didn't realize in the rest of the country, I mean, when we heard that about
[Guest]: everybody's thing was that the moment turning point for everyone when they realized hope was
[Guest]: there, when they heard that Indira Gandhi is trailing in rivalry. I mean, that was an impossible
[Guest]: thing to believe. And that only came later in the day, because in the early point of the day,
[Guest]: you and PTI and you and I were only giving results from the South, which are all pro Congress.
[Guest]: And even though when I first heard that she's trailing, I had come back from covering East
[Guest]: Delhi counting, which hadn't even started. I came back to the Indian Express and the stringer,
[Guest]: the local fellow there said it on the phone. It was not in writing that she's trailing in
[Guest]: rivalry. I mean, that was the turning point when people realize that she is trailing. I mean,
[Guest]: she was like invincible, you know, so invincible that for many, for more than a year after that,
[Guest]: whenever I heard Doordarshan, and I said, and they said, the prime minister said this, and the prime
[Guest]: minister said that, I would scratch my head and say, why is she saying that? Before I realized
[Guest]: that she's not the prime minister. It's Maraji Desai. Yeah. And I wonder if she bought some of
[Amit Varma]: her own Kool-Aid in the sense that you mentioned that when the media was completely muzzled,
[Amit Varma]: that her narrative was that, see, nobody supports the opposition. It was only media,
[Amit Varma]: the propaganda, and now that we've, the media is not spreading the propaganda,
[Amit Varma]: nobody supports them. So I wonder if she bought some of that and assumed, you know,
[Guest]: this is what happens everywhere that which is happening in the Congress today, unfortunately,
[Guest]: they're not given a true picture of what is on the ground. I'm sure it's happening in the BJP as well.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my question.
[Amit Varma]: We are a nation of, you know, psychophants, unfortunately.
[Guest]: Psychophants and psychopaths.
[Guest]: They don't want to convey what they feel is unpleasant news.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the, you know, the finest headlines during this period, I think, was when
[Amit Varma]: Jagjivan Ram had this big rally after the thing, and they didn't want people to go to the rally.
[Amit Varma]: So they decided, let us telecast Bobby on Doordarshan during that time.
[Amit Varma]: And his nickname, of course, was Babu. And the headlines the next day was something like
[Amit Varma]: Babu beats Bobby, because everyone turned up at the sort of rally.
[Guest]: I must confess, I watch Bobby.
[Guest]: You watch Bobby?
[Guest]: Not because I wasn't assigned that day. Something happened. It was a sign.
[Guest]: It was a Sunday and I wasn't assigned on duty that day.
[Guest]: So we were watching the thing.
[Amit Varma]: Shocking. I would never have thought you are one of the people who watch that.
[Guest]: No, I wasn't supportive in the thing, but I wasn't on duty and I was home with my kids.
[Guest]: So they were watching.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my question to you.
[Amit Varma]: We know the media was muzzled.
[Amit Varma]: So all of the atrocities and news wasn't getting out.
[Amit Varma]: You also mentioned that while people in Delhi kind of knew what was happening,
[Amit Varma]: people in the rest of the country, it was obviously much harder.
[Guest]: Yeah, I don't think because Bombay was certainly not.
[Guest]: I got so many things up on some of my stories, reactions saying
[Guest]: because they were supporters of the emergency.
[Guest]: They were saying that we didn't know all this.
[Amit Varma]: So my question is, what led to this incredible wave of support for the opposition,
[Amit Varma]: the anti-Congress wave, if the news wasn't getting out that things are bad?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the news getting out was the trains are running on time.
[Guest]: I think that word of mouth in Delhi, it had certainly spread everywhere.
[Guest]: Maybe the people I met in Bombay were from the upper middle class type people
[Guest]: who were not affected directly.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the funny bits you point out about sort of a minor character,
[Amit Varma]: even in the cast of Sanjay's Kothari is something that happens after the emergency,
[Amit Varma]: where you write, quote, one of his stormtroopers, Bhola Pandey,
[Amit Varma]: brandishing a cricket ball, which was assumed to be a grenade,
[Amit Varma]: hijacked a Delhi bound Indian Airlines flight from Kanpur,
[Amit Varma]: demanding the withdrawal of all cases against Indira Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: Upon the Gandhi's return to power, he was rewarded with an assembly ticket, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And what seems to be happening is that even though the emergency is over,
[Amit Varma]: even though democracy seems to have reasserted itself,
[Amit Varma]: it's actually in a way the political game is the same old same old.
[Amit Varma]: The game of still the same kind of cronyism, the same kind of Kothari is the same kind of
[Guest]: may not be as extreme as it was during that those 19 months.
[Guest]: But yeah, and this is one of the worst periods.
[Guest]: There was another period which was bad.
[Guest]: I felt threatened now, I felt threatened then.
[Guest]: And towards the last days of Rajiv Gandhi's
[Guest]: regime, when the boffers was coming out, not Rajiv himself, but his the people around him
[Guest]: were also trying to I know that the Indian Post, the newspaper I was working for then,
[Guest]: the owner, Mr. Singhania, was given a list of people who were not to be written about.
[Guest]: Gave it to Vinod, Vinod told me on the phone.
[Guest]: And I thought when you're written about means that you have to get an exclusive story on them.
[Guest]: So when I did a story on Satish Sharma, which was a press conference by Irani from the statesman,
[Guest]: I just was doing my duty.
[Guest]: I did cover the press conference.
[Guest]: The desk got carried away and made it the first lead.
[Guest]: And the next thing I know, it was finito for the Indian Post.
[Guest]: So, I mean, there have been other periods, not so well known, when there's been a huge
[Guest]: clampdown on the media.
[Guest]: So when you say finito for the Indian Post, what happened?
[Amit Varma]: Singhania's family made it clear that he had to get out of that newspaper
[Guest]: and he was financing it.
[Guest]: And I think he's in his baguette now.
[Guest]: He was financing it, and I think he's in his biography also.
[Guest]: He mentioned it in a little, they're all business people, so they can't.
[Amit Varma]: And Vinod said, well, what are we going to do?
[Guest]: They're closing down.
[Guest]: Then Times of India came out with the idea that they'll take over all the people from
[Guest]: the Indian Post.
[Guest]: But the Times of India's idea was they did not want any newspaper to cut into the circulation
[Guest]: of the Times.
[Guest]: So their idea is to put a rival type of thing, like the mirror in Bombay, and until you close
[Guest]: it down when it's served its purpose.
[Guest]: I didn't join that.
[Guest]: I stayed with the Indian Post for the few months that was there, but it was run by the
[Guest]: Samachar people, Gujarat Samachar people.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, so it was your story that caused it to be shut down.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm kidding.
[Guest]: No, I mean, I realized it was that story, I felt terrible about it.
[Guest]: I felt terrible, but I tried to rationalize that I wasn't doing a special stories, I was
[Guest]: doing a press conference.
[Guest]: But I did it, perhaps I wrote it with too much passion and they put it as the lead.
[Guest]: Obviously, the desk people were not aware.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I'm just guessing that if it was not your story, it would have been something else.
[Guest]: It would have been something else.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk a little bit about politics now, because I feel that your understanding of
[Amit Varma]: the inside business of politics and the people in it is like so acute and almost second to
[Amit Varma]: none.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll take a quote from your book first, to get to my question.
[Amit Varma]: And you're really quoting something that Ajit Bhattacharya wrote in Times of India on July
[Amit Varma]: 16, 1973, a few months before I was born.
[Amit Varma]: You're saying that quote, he pointed out that in the seven and a half years, Mrs. Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: had been PM, the central government had invoked precedence rule 22 times to take over the
[Amit Varma]: administration of a state.
[Amit Varma]: And in the previous 16 years, these powers had been used only 10 times, you know, despite
[Amit Varma]: many representations and pleas, she refused to revoke the emergency powers invoked in
[Amit Varma]: 1971 during the war with Pakistan, which included the state's right to make preventive arrests
[Amit Varma]: without trial under MISA, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the question I'm getting at is this, that in what ways did the Congress as a party change
[Amit Varma]: during this period, like I had an episode in the decline of the Congress with the political
[Amit Varma]: scientist Rahul Verma.
[Amit Varma]: And one of Rahul's points was that this is actually a critical period in the history
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress because the Congress over here centralizes power massively.
[Amit Varma]: I think Sugata Srinivas Raju also might have made the same point or I think Vinay made
[Amit Varma]: the same point when we are talking about, you know, the Congress and the idea being
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, chief ministers had much less power, everything was dictated from the center.
[Amit Varma]: So as a party, you will decide, you know, which person in your party becomes a CM of
[Amit Varma]: a state you want.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, you know, outside the context of the party, when you're in government itself,
[Amit Varma]: there is this complete centralizing mindset.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, Gyan Prakash in his book on the emergency writes that, look, the emergency
[Amit Varma]: was constitutional and not a surprise, because the people who framed our constitution under
[Amit Varma]: the pressures that they were in with the country falling apart, and you didn't know if the
[Amit Varma]: center would hold, centralized a lot of power in the constitution.
[Amit Varma]: So there are these two centralizing impulses.
[Amit Varma]: One is of the Indian state, which has been designed to be centralized.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is of the Congress Party itself, which almost as if it is mimicking that is
[Amit Varma]: centralizing everything so much that there's practically no democracy within the party
[Amit Varma]: as such.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of these movements?
[Guest]: These are centralizing may be a bad thing, but eventually there is the constitution,
[Guest]: which the makers of our constitution made sure that they protected our fundamental rights
[Guest]: and which the Supreme Court also held that you cannot amend what is the basic structure
[Guest]: of the constitution.
[Guest]: So eventually how our country goes in the future, I feel depends even more than on the
[Guest]: media that is on the courts, how they will interpret these authoritarian moves towards
[Guest]: to seize all power and take away the rights of citizens.
[Guest]: The media, of course, plays a big, big role in awareness, but eventually everyone looks
[Guest]: to the courts.
[Guest]: Once the courts become, you know.
[Amit Varma]: To some extent, I would push back and say that our constitution doesn't protect all
[Amit Varma]: our fundamental rights, like the right to free speech, for example.
[Guest]: Well, it's our interpretation.
[Guest]: The court is left to interpret this.
[Guest]: And that maybe was a lacuna in, I mean, it has to be left to the courts to how you interpret
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So the way you select your judges is key to keeping a democracy.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll go back to the, you know, one part of the question, which was about the Congress
[Amit Varma]: party, like where we, what do you feel about the way the Congress is today?
[Amit Varma]: Because what appears to me to be the case is that gradually over the decades, party
[Amit Varma]: power within the Congress was so centralized that even if they didn't have inner party
[Amit Varma]: elections, that's a separate matter and a separate problem.
[Amit Varma]: But that sense that state leaders are powerful, that state leaders have a voice and all of
[Guest]: that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that all went away with Mrs. Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: That all went away.
[Guest]: And such a strong leader as Nehru, you know, with such a big mandate, he was very conscious.
[Guest]: He allowed powerful chief ministers who were not at all subservient to him to continue.
[Guest]: He did have that much.
[Guest]: It was Mrs. Gandhi who had the authoritarian streak and it has been followed by.
[Guest]: When Narasimha Rao was there, I think we had a lot of progress in this country because
[Guest]: there was no strong central leadership.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And what do you feel about the state of the Congress today in the sense that once Indira
[Amit Varma]: what Indira Gandhi started in the late 60s, centralizing power, building a coterie around
[Amit Varma]: her, stripping away accountability, do you think that that would inevitably have led
[Amit Varma]: to where we are today, where you have the people in charge of the Congress are completely
[Amit Varma]: out of touch with reality, completely out of touch with the people.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the party just sort of been deracinated.
[Guest]: I think the basic fault lies with the Gandhi's who somehow feel the sense of entitlement
[Guest]: that only they are in a position to lead the fortunes of the Congress.
[Guest]: You know, we hear all the story about sacrifice, but that's not true because always.
[Guest]: Why was Narasimha Rao given such a hard time?
[Guest]: Because though he tried his best to mollify them, they really wanted back control of their
[Guest]: party and of the government.
[Guest]: And I think they might have become slightly delusional thinking that nobody else but them.
[Guest]: It is true that if they don't step aside, nobody else can take control of the party.
[Guest]: But if they were noble enough and self-sacrificing enough to say, let's have a genuine election,
[Guest]: I think there's a great future for the Congress because we all want a strong opposition.
[Guest]: We all want a liberal voice.
[Guest]: The Congress, as I say, represents all the right values that most of us hold dear.
[Guest]: But they don't follow them themselves.
[Guest]: I mean, the fact that they don't have any inner party democracy themselves, the way
[Guest]: they've been throwing out, you know, I mean, the stalwarts in their party are leaving.
[Guest]: You can say you have young people, but the fact is, it's nothing to do with young or
[Guest]: old.
[Guest]: You only want psychophants around you.
[Guest]: And they're not even that interested in running the country.
[Guest]: I mean, nobody would leave at a time like this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And we are recording this on August 30th, by the way.
[Amit Varma]: So whenever this airs, who knows what would have changed between then.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't think the Gandhis would have given up their hold on the Congress for sure.
[Guest]: No, I don't think so.
[Guest]: I don't think it's possible now.
[Guest]: It's just sad.
[Guest]: People have long forgotten that actually the party was not founded by any Gandhi or Nehru.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And it is still a party with a deep organizational base.
[Guest]: I don't know how much of that organization remains.
[Guest]: It remains in some states.
[Guest]: In the South, yes, it remains.
[Guest]: But in UP, when they get down to 2.5% of the vote, there's not much organization left.
[Guest]: So when people say that, oh, you're a turncoat and the last few people have left.
[Guest]: I said, what option do they have to join the BJP?
[Guest]: They may not have approval of everything in the BJP.
[Guest]: But if you want to be in politics, there's no point being in the Congress in UP.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me now about a class of people you actually live among.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what Prime Minister Modi derides as a Lutyens elite.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I have many friends who would fall into the class of typical Delhi liberals.
[Amit Varma]: And my big sort of complaint against them is that they're living in a bubble,
[Amit Varma]: that they've always been in a bubble.
[Amit Varma]: They don't see the real country.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of their reflexive positions are, as history has borne out, just flat out wrong.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, just leave that aside.
[Amit Varma]: But I feel that this bubble deprives them of the ability to actually understand this country.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I know many people will still say, no, no, Rahul Gandhi is the option to
[Amit Varma]: Modi when it is clear that Rahul Gandhi is enabling Modi that, you know, one of my friends
[Amit Varma]: said that Modi probably has a portrait of Rahul Gandhi in his office.
[Guest]: I have always felt that.
[Guest]: He does pooja around me.
[Guest]: First time I wrote it, they toned it down.
[Guest]: But I said his biggest ally, Modi's biggest ally is Rahul Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this, you know, this stereotype class called the Lutyens elite.
[Guest]: One thing I should make clear, I am certainly not a part of this Lutyens Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: But you live among them.
[Guest]: They look upon me with suspicion.
[Guest]: And why?
[Guest]: This is what I call the polarization of society in Delhi, which is not there in Bombay.
[Guest]: I am looked upon with suspicion and I will always be looked upon with suspicion because
[Guest]: I started my career in the motherland.
[Guest]: I am looked upon with suspicion because I'm related to Subramanian Swamy, who was for
[Guest]: many years in the thing.
[Guest]: My husband happens to be a supporter and was in jail.
[Guest]: So people will not look at me as an individual in my own right that I have many times criticized
[Guest]: the government and indirectly may have in my columns, I think as well.
[Guest]: But I have been categorized because that's the way Delhi society works.
[Guest]: In fact, I go, oh, you wrote that piece.
[Guest]: How did you write that?
[Guest]: You know, recently I wrote a piece about the media, you know, making fun of the government.
[Guest]: But they expect that you will write only on one side or the other.
[Guest]: That's my quarrel with Lutyens Delhi.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in your body of work, you have been ruthless with everyone.
[Amit Varma]: You've criticized everyone.
[Amit Varma]: You've torn apart everyone.
[Amit Varma]: And yet they will say, oh, but, you know, why are you against Rahul if you write?
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: Senior Congress leader, I shouldn't mention his name, sent me a message.
[Guest]: The other day, oh, for Nikarwala, you are suddenly turning colors.
[Guest]: I said, what the hell?
[Guest]: Just because I don't have to pay like you, you know, Abhishek, your first family does
[Guest]: not mean that you can call me a Nikarwala, anything like that.
[Guest]: Why does everyone have to have a, you know, a particular way?
[Guest]: Why do you have to associate if somebody else is in your family or you worked in such a
[Guest]: paper that you have to be one way or the other?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, my friend and someone I admire greatly, Ramchandra Guha, he shares our distaste for
[Amit Varma]: this Congress leadership.
[Amit Varma]: And he's also so targeted by Congress people on Twitter, with one person calling him a
[Amit Varma]: Sanghi uncle.
[Amit Varma]: How is he?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is one of the bravest dissenters of our time.
[Amit Varma]: And you're calling him Sanghi uncle because he doesn't like the chief of your stupid
[Guest]: little tribe and your stupid little government.
[Guest]: There was a time once, I don't usually go on television, once he was singing Sonia's
[Guest]: praises.
[Guest]: But I guess he's realized since then.
[Amit Varma]: I guess he's realized.
[Guest]: I don't know when this would have been.
[Guest]: This was many, many years ago.
[Guest]: I think when Manmohan Singh was there.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but the thing with Ram and why I will defend him is that.
[Guest]: No, I admire him greatly.
[Guest]: I love his books.
[Guest]: But even they, they are also see everything in a polarized fashion.
[Guest]: Either you're on my side or you're against.
[Guest]: They can't see shades of grey.
[Guest]: It's all black and white.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, in Ram's defense, I'd say he's intellectually honest.
[Guest]: So he will change his mind when he sees that.
[Guest]: No, no, I don't mind them changing.
[Guest]: Tavlin has changed their mind also.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah, but my point is that why can't somebody write one time complimentary and one time,
[Guest]: you know, analytically about the same person without having any agenda?
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: I've, I'm tired of crying myself hoarse about how I'm an equal opportunity offender,
[Amit Varma]: because every time I write something against one party, people will be like.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me, you know, we've spoken about the decline in the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about what happened.
[Amit Varma]: What's happened to the BJP?
[Guest]: It's a totally new party.
[Guest]: There's from what it was in Vajpayee's time.
[Guest]: People always said that it was a battle between Vajpayee and RSS.
[Guest]: Vajpayee with his liberal values and the thing.
[Guest]: And it was a ding dong battle, one side up, one side down.
[Guest]: But I think in this particular time, Mr. Modi has complete control and the RSS is not going
[Guest]: to tangle with him.
[Guest]: And he believes in action and that only he can decide.
[Guest]: He does not believe in compromise or in debate.
[Guest]: You can see the way the parliament runs.
[Guest]: I mean, there's no attempt anymore to get views from the other side.
[Guest]: It's a dictatorial style.
[Guest]: A lot of these people have come from states where this model was in force and they've
[Guest]: reproduced it at the center.
[Amit Varma]: So enlighten me on this.
[Amit Varma]: And you're someone who's sort of not just written about these people for 40 years, but
[Amit Varma]: in many cases, you've known them as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I have no idea how well you know, Mr. Modi.
[Amit Varma]: But something that confuses me about him and about many of the people in this dispensation
[Amit Varma]: is that I know what they are against.
[Amit Varma]: What are they for?
[Amit Varma]: Like, are they just driven by, say, anti-Muslim hatred or anti-Latins elite hatred or whatever?
[Amit Varma]: Those are the things they are against.
[Amit Varma]: What are they for?
[Guest]: I think they are neglected, you know, the Latins, Delhi people.
[Guest]: Also, I think may have left a deep complex in a lot of people who came from other parts
[Guest]: of the country to Delhi for their political work and were sneered and looked upon and
[Guest]: treated as if they were second class citizens.
[Guest]: I think that impact may have had its own consequences also, you know, I can't say, I have no
[Guest]: binary there, but there was a class of people in Delhi who thought that they were the arbiters
[Guest]: of taste, of morals, of politics.
[Guest]: And that was a form of dictatorship as well.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great way to put it, and you feel that some of these people coming from the
[Amit Varma]: outside would then resent it.
[Guest]: Definitely, definitely, and rightly so as well.
[Guest]: I mean, you sneer at their language, at their pronunciation, at their articulation.
[Amit Varma]: Is then so much of politics tragically driven by the resentment and anger of the people
[Amit Varma]: or by the resentment and anger of individuals, as opposed to a vision for what the world
[Amit Varma]: should be?
[Guest]: I mean, not so much of politics, but with some people, yes, and some people, no.
[Guest]: But unfortunately, we have had, India has had more than its share, perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's come to the current time that when you sort of look around you today, you've
[Amit Varma]: seen 50 years of journalism, how it's evolved, how it's changed.
[Amit Varma]: What's your overall sense?
[Amit Varma]: Like, if you were 20 today, what is it about these times as a journalist that would excite
[Amit Varma]: you tremendously?
[Amit Varma]: And what is it that you think you would not have had, which you perhaps had then?
[Guest]: If I was 20 years today, I know I wouldn't go into journalism.
[Guest]: And I gave my advice to my children also, don't go into journalism.
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Guest]: Because I don't think you'll have the full freedom to express yourself.
[Guest]: And lead to other problems.
[Guest]: You'll either become cynical, opportunistic.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not a career that one would should start with it any longer.
[Amit Varma]: Let's put it that way.
[Amit Varma]: Are you cynical today?
[Guest]: No, I'm not cynical.
[Guest]: I'm at the end of my career.
[Guest]: I have nothing to lose one way or the other.
[Amit Varma]: But you feel young people could become cynical?
[Guest]: Well, or they would become bitter.
[Guest]: Because who knows?
[Guest]: There's no doubt that in the last since 2019, freedom of the media has declined enormously.
[Guest]: Ownership has become much more, you know, media ownership is being
[Guest]: brought under the stranglehold of the government's control.
[Guest]: So, it's not a happy position to be in.
[Guest]: I mean, we saw that NDTV, for example, whatever else, it's extraordinary that this gentleman
[Guest]: should have enough money to take it over.
[Guest]: And I don't think he could have done so without, not just the blessings of the government,
[Guest]: but an active participation.
[Guest]: You know, in the earlier days, there were committed individuals who brought out publications
[Guest]: on belief.
[Guest]: Now, most of the people who own the media are businessmen who have other interests.
[Guest]: And when they used to say that about the jute press, to be fair to Ramnath Goenka, I don't
[Guest]: think he had any jute.
[Guest]: He went by his convictions.
[Amit Varma]: And that you feel has changed?
[Guest]: I don't see many places.
[Guest]: I do see, but they're, you know, in a great minority.
[Guest]: They're not mainstream.
[Guest]: It's like my motherland.
[Amit Varma]: So, one sign of hope that I do see and tell me what you feel about it is that I think
[Amit Varma]: that one thing that has changed for the better, and I agree with all your laments about everything
[Amit Varma]: you said, but one thing that one possibility that has opened up rather is that the means
[Amit Varma]: of production are now in the hand of the individuals.
[Amit Varma]: So, at the very least, if, you know, no mainstream paper will publish something that I write,
[Amit Varma]: I can publish it on my own.
[Amit Varma]: I can make a video.
[Guest]: I agree with you totally.
[Guest]: It is the real saviour will have to be the social media, because that is the difference
[Guest]: between the days of the emergency and today.
[Guest]: In the past, Indira Gandhi had simply to control a very small number of publications.
[Guest]: Even the TV wasn't there.
[Guest]: It was Doordarshan, everything state owned, and so there was nothing to fear.
[Guest]: All you had to fear was word of mouth, which is very powerful.
[Guest]: But today, it's not just word of mouth.
[Guest]: It is word of, through the internet, which is such a powerful spreader of the message.
[Guest]: And that's what I, you're right.
[Guest]: That is the saviour.
[Amit Varma]: And not just word of mouth, but word of mouth, given scale.
[Guest]: Yeah, given scale.
[Guest]: So, in that sense, yes, if you're talking, I was talking about journalism in the conventional
[Guest]: media, but you're talking, I'm old fashioned, but you're talking about it in the social
[Guest]: media.
[Guest]: With that, I agree with you.
[Guest]: There's plenty of scope for youngsters to come into that.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: And then there's one way in which at least something is happening.
[Guest]: The marvellous thing about technology today is that you don't need an organisation.
[Guest]: You can do it on a one-man show and have enormous impact.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that's what you would do if you were starting today?
[Guest]: Oh, I am a very stout person who bread and butter jobs were important to me.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, two last questions.
[Amit Varma]: And okay, actually, three last questions, because what I asked you about journalism,
[Amit Varma]: I also want to ask you about politics, which is that you've spoken about how polarised
[Amit Varma]: the times have become, and how a lot of the graces and courtesies of past eras where people
[Amit Varma]: like in Arun Jaitley would reach across the aisle, and those are kind of over, but have
[Amit Varma]: things gone so bad that there is no coming back from here?
[Amit Varma]: Because what I see in modern times is that there is an incentive to always go to the
[Amit Varma]: extremes, that how do you rise within your own party or your own tribe by being more
[Amit Varma]: extreme than the other guy, and there is that competition to be more extreme.
[Amit Varma]: Equally, we are in a situation where if you're in politics, you're never going to praise
[Amit Varma]: what your opponent does or agrees with it, no matter what it is, you must reflexively
[Amit Varma]: fight it.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that we've crossed a line that there is no going back, that politics,
[Amit Varma]: the rhetoric of politics will always be ugly, and everything will always be about narrative
[Amit Varma]: battles and not a pursuit of the truth or of welfare?
[Guest]: They're always idealistic people also.
[Guest]: So I don't think it's beyond change at all, and I have lived so long that I have seen
[Guest]: that situations which you thought were there for a lifetime and last keep changing, I mean.
[Guest]: Like the emergency?
[Guest]: Like the emergency is one very thing, that was within a few years.
[Guest]: So I don't know, I think that by nature we are a very, we've had democracy so long,
[Guest]: that's not something that the people will give up lightly.
[Guest]: It's not like a China or a Russia, you know, where they've always had a system of autocracy
[Guest]: over them.
[Guest]: So I, and I've seen that always something happens and things change, nothing remains
[Guest]: static.
[Amit Varma]: My second last question is about, you know, something you might say is not a big deal
[Amit Varma]: and you'll take it for granted, but one of the things that I admire about you from a
[Amit Varma]: distance, obviously, because it's the first time we've met, but one of the things I admire
[Amit Varma]: about you from a distance is the engagement and the energy.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that look, I've been a columnist, okay, I haven't managed to be a columnist
[Amit Varma]: in a newspaper for more than two or three years.
[Amit Varma]: This podcast has gone on for almost six years.
[Amit Varma]: That's great.
[Amit Varma]: You have, you know, this column itself is that your writing is more than 30 years old.
[Amit Varma]: And as you mentioned, it started before that even, and not just the fact that you are still
[Amit Varma]: doing a column, but the fact that you are still showing such enthusiastic and passionate
[Amit Varma]: engagement with the world.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas looking at myself, sometimes I feel so jaded.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes I just want to give up and just forget about it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just do my own thing.
[Amit Varma]: What drives you?
[Amit Varma]: You know, when you wake up in the morning, you're the kind of person I imagine is looking
[Amit Varma]: forward to whatever you set out to do that day.
[Amit Varma]: So what kind of drives you and like, is there something intentional in that you have sat
[Amit Varma]: down and thought about the things that may make you happy and you've decided, okay, I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to do these, this is how I'm going to live my life.
[Amit Varma]: And nobody dare come in my way.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your personal philosophy towards yourself.
[Guest]: I'm sorry to let you down, but I really don't have such a structured personality.
[Guest]: I never knew how long my column would last.
[Unknown]: I always said it was going, it's going.
[Guest]: Grace of God, it's lasted so long.
[Guest]: Who knows?
[Guest]: I mean, you've normalized it for yourself, but it's so inspiring to see you at work.
[Amit Varma]: My final question and a question I ask all my guests whenever we do this show, I'd like
[Amit Varma]: you to recommend for both me and my listeners, books, films, music that make you feel like
[Amit Varma]: you're a part of it, that means a lot to you, that makes you so happy or that means so much
[Amit Varma]: to you that you want to share it with everyone.
[Guest]: I haven't most high class tastes in books and music.
[Guest]: Well, I just read a book, which I really, really liked.
[Guest]: I don't read that much fiction, but I just read it very recently and I'm trying to remember
[Guest]: the name, All the...
[Amit Varma]: All the Light That You Can See.
[Guest]: All the Light That You Can See.
[Guest]: It's a beautiful book, but my real preferences are for biographies.
[Amit Varma]: So which are the memorable ones you've enjoyed?
[Guest]: So many gossipy biographies about people.
[Amit Varma]: And what was the last film you saw which really moved you?
[Guest]: I... terrible, I don't go to cinema theater, what entertainment I see is on Netflix or
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: And they're very good.
[Guest]: Some of them are excellent.
[Guest]: And the last one I saw, which I saw this young actress and I thought she was very good, Alia
[Guest]: Bhatt.
[Guest]: She did two movies.
[Guest]: One was Ganga Bhai and the other one was terrible.
[Guest]: I don't really know much.
[Unknown]: That one she's done.
[Guest]: She's a very good actress.
[Guest]: Darlings.
[Guest]: I mean, it fizzles out a bit at the end, but it was good entertainment.
[Guest]: I saw this serial called Panchayat.
[Guest]: I liked it.
[Guest]: There are quite a few, but I don't really remember their names.
[Guest]: You know, I watched them at night and...
[Amit Varma]: Kumiji, I need to thank you so much for all your time, because, you know, one of our mutual
[Amit Varma]: friends told me about you.
[Amit Varma]: He said that Kumi is a kind of no-nonsense person who will never waste anyone's time.
[Amit Varma]: If she goes to somebody for a story, she'll get what she wants, but she won't do small
[Amit Varma]: talk and she'll respect that person's time and space.
[Amit Varma]: And knowing that, hearing that, just makes me feel even more thankful that you've given
[Amit Varma]: me three hours of your time today.
[Amit Varma]: And thank you so much for your kindness.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of you calling me.
[Guest]: I hope it's of use.
[Guest]: I don't know, think it is much, but anyhow, thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out the show notes, enter rabbit
[Amit Varma]: holes at will.
[Amit Varma]: Kumi is not on social media, but do buy all her books, especially her remarkable book
[Amit Varma]: on the emergency.
[Amit Varma]: I recommend it highly.
[Amit Varma]: It's a must read.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.